

Del0406

    Presidência
    da República

    Casa Civil

    Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicos

DECREE-LAW No. 406, OF DECEMBER 31,
1968.

	Compiled text

	In force
	See Complementary Law
	No. 116, of 2003.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Effects production
    Establishes
    general rules of financial law, applicable to taxes on operations relating to
    the circulation of goods and on services of any nature, and makes other
    provisions.

THE PRESIDENT
OF THE REPUBLIC , using the powers conferred on him by § 1 of article 2 of Institutional
Act No. 5, of December 13, 1968, resolves to issue the following Decree-law:

Art 1 The tax
on operations relating to the circulation of goods has as its taxable event:

I - the departure of
goods from a commercial, industrial or producing establishment;

II - the entry,
into a commercial, industrial or producing establishment, of goods imported from abroad
by the holder of the establishment;

III - the
supply of food, beverages and other goods in restaurants, bars, cafés
and similar establishments.

§ 1
The transfer of ownership of goods is treated as a departure when such goods do not
pass through the establishment of the transferor.

§ 2 When
goods are sent to a general warehouse or to the taxpayer's own
closed depot, in the same State the departure is considered to have occurred at the location of the
sending establishment:

I - at the moment
of departure of the goods from the general warehouse or the closed depot, unless to return
to the establishment of origin;

II - at the moment
of the transfer of ownership of goods deposited in a general warehouse or in a closed
depot.

§ 3 The tax
does not apply:

I - To the
departure of manufactured products destined for abroad;

II - To
fiduciary alienation as security;     (See Law No. 5,589,
of 1970)

III -
To the departure, from an establishment providing the services referred to in article 8,
of goods to be used or that have been used in the provision of such services;

 III - To the departure, from an establishment providing the
services referred to in article 8, of goods to be used or that have been
used in the provision of such services, except in cases of incidence provided for
in the list of taxed services.      (Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834,
of 1969)

IV - The departure from
an establishment of a transport company or of a depot on behalf and order of the latter, of
goods belonging to third parties.

§ 4 The following are
exempt from the tax:

I - Departures
of containers, receptacles and packaging, including sacking when not charged to the
recipient or not computed in the value of the goods they contain and provided that they
must return to the sending establishment or to another establishment of the same holder;

II - Departures
of containers, receptacles and packaging, including sacking, in return to the sending
establishment or to another establishment of the same holder or to a deposit in its name;

III - The departure
of goods destined for the domestic market and produced in industrial establishments
as a result of international bidding, with the participation of domestic industries,
against payment with funds from convertible foreign currency arising from
long-term financing from international financial institutions or foreign
governmental entities;

IV - The entries
of goods into the importer's establishment, when imported from abroad and
intended for the manufacture of parts, machinery and equipment for the domestic market as a
result of international bidding with the participation of domestic industry, against
payment with funds from convertible foreign currency arising from long-term
financing from international financial institutions or foreign governmental
entities;

V - The entry of
goods imported from abroad when intended for use as raw material
in industrialization processes, in the importer's establishment, provided that the departure
of the resulting manufactured products remains effectively subject to payment of the tax;

VI - The entry
of goods whose import is exempt from the tax, within the competence of the Union,
on the import of foreign products;

VII - The
entry, into the importer's establishment, of goods imported from abroad under the
"draw back" regime;

VIII - The departure,
from the establishment of a contractor of hydraulic works or civil construction, of
goods acquired from third parties and intended for a work under the responsibility of the sender;

 VIII - The departure, from the establishment of a civil
construction contractor, hydraulic works and other similar works, including
auxiliary or complementary services, of goods acquired from third parties and intended for the
constructions, works or services referred to under the responsibility of the sender.
(Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

IX - Departures
of goods from a producer's establishment to the establishment of a cooperative of which
it is a member, located in the same State;

X - Departures of goods from an
establishment of a producers' cooperative to an establishment in the same
State, of the cooperative itself, of central cooperatives, or of a federation of
cooperatives of which the sending cooperative is a member.

§ 5 The
provision of § 3, item I, also applies to the departure of goods from
industrial establishments or their deposits destined for:

I - Commercial
companies that operate exclusively in the export trade;

II - Bonded warehouses and customs warehouses.

§ 6 In the case
of paragraph 5, the reintroduction of the goods into the domestic market shall render exigible the
tax due for the departure destined for the establishments referred to therein.

§ 7 The
States shall exempt from the tax on the circulation of goods the retail sale,
directly to the consumer, of basic necessity goods that they specify, and may
not establish a difference based on those participating in the taxed operation

Art 2 The tax base is:

I - The value of
the operation from which the departure of the goods results;

II - In the absence of
the value referred to in the preceding item, the current price of the goods, or their equivalent,
in the wholesale market of the sender's location;

III - In the absence
of the value and the impossibility of determining the price referred to in the preceding item:

a) if the
sender is an industrial party, the FOB price at the industrial establishment, in cash;

b) if the
sender is a merchant, the FOB price at the commercial establishment, in cash, in sales to
other merchants or industrial parties.

IV - In the case of
item II of article 1, the tax base is the value stated in the
import documents, converted into cruzeiros at the exchange rate effectively applied in each case and
increased by the value of import duties and duties on manufactured products and
other customs expenses effectively paid.

§ 1 In
departures of goods to an establishment in another State, belonging to the same holder
or its representative, when the goods are not to undergo, at the establishment of
destination, any alteration whatsoever, except repackaging, and when the shipment is
made at a sale price to a non-taxpayer, uniform throughout the country, the tax
base shall be equivalent to 75% of this price.

§ 2 In the
case of item III, "b", of this article, if the sending commercial establishment does not
make sales to other merchants or to industrial parties, the tax base shall be
equivalent to 75% of the sale price at the sending establishment, subject to the
provision of § 3.

§ 3 For
application of item III of the "caput" of this article, the weighted average of the prices
effectively charged by the sending establishment, in the second month prior to the
shipment, shall be adopted.

§ 4 In
interstate operations between establishments of different taxpayers when
there is an adjustment to the value of the operation after the shipment, the difference shall be subject to the
tax at the establishment of origin.

§ 5 The
amount of the tax on manufactured products does not form part of the tax base
defined in this article:

I - When the
operation constitutes a taxable event for both taxes;

II - In
relation to goods subject to the tax on manufactured products with a tax base
related to the maximum retail sale price marked by the manufacturer.

§ 6 In
departures of goods resulting from sale operations to those in charge of executing
the minimum price policy, the tax base is the minimum price set by the
competent federal authority.

§ 7 The
amount of the tax on the circulation of goods forms part of the tax base referred to in
this article, the corresponding itemization constituting a mere indication for
control purposes.

§ 8 In the departure
of goods to abroad or to the establishments referred to in § 5 of
article 1, the tax base shall be the net invoiced value, to which shall not be added
freight earned by a third party, insurance or expenses arising from air or sea
shipping services.

§ 9 - When responsible party status is attributed to the
manufacturer, the wholesale merchant or the producer, in relation to the tax due by the
retail merchant, the tax base shall be:
(Included by Complementary Law No.
44, of 1983)

a) the value of the operation carried out by the responsible party, plus the
estimated profit margin of the retail merchant obtained by applying a
percentage set by law to that value;
(Included
by Complementary Law No. 44, of 1983)

b) the value of the operation carried out by the responsible party, plus the profit margin
attributed to the reseller, in the case of goods with a maximum or single sale price,
marked by the manufacturer or set by the competent authority.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of
1983)

§ 10 - If the effective profit margin is normally higher than that estimated under
item a of the preceding paragraph, the percentage established there shall be replaced by
the one determined in an agreement entered into under § 6 of art. 23 of the
Federal Constitution.      (Included
by Complementary Law No. 44, of 1983)

Art 3 The tax on the circulation of goods is non-cumulative, deducting, in
each operation, the amount charged in preceding ones, by the same or another State.

§ 1 State
law shall provide that the amount due result from the difference to the greater, in a
given period, between the tax relating to goods that departed from the
establishment and that paid in relation to goods that entered it. The balance found
in a given period in favor of the taxpayer carries over to the following period or periods.

§ 2 The
States may allow producers the option of deducting a fixed percentage
as the amount of tax paid in relation to goods entered into the
respective establishment.

§ 3 The
reversal of the tax relating to goods entered for use, as
raw material or secondary material, in the manufacture and packaging of the products referred to
in § 3, item I and § 4, and item III, of article 1, shall not be required. The provision of this
paragraph does not apply, unless otherwise provided by state legislation, to
raw materials of animal or vegetable origin that individually represent more than 50%
of the value of the product resulting from their industrialization.

§ 4 Companies producing phonographic records and other sound
recording materials may deduct from the amount of the tax on the circulation of goods the value of
artistic copyright and related rights, demonstrably paid by the company, in the same
period, to authors and artists, national or domiciled in the country, as well as to their
heirs and successors, even through entities that represent them.

§ 5 For
purposes of the calculation referred to in § 1 of this article, the States may determine the
exclusion of tax relating to goods entered into the establishment when this
tax has been refunded, in whole or in part, to the taxpayer itself or to other taxpayers,
by any taxing entity, even in the form of a bonus or incentive.

 § 6 The provision of the preceding paragraph does not apply to
goods whose industrialization is the object of a tax incentive, bonus or incentive,
resulting from recognition or granting by an administrative act prior to December 31,
1968 and based on State Law promulgated up to that same date.
(Included by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)       (See Complementary Law
No. 24, of 1975).

§ 7 - State law may establish that the
amount due by the taxpayer, in a given period, be calculated based on a
value set by estimate, with a guarantee, at the end of the period, of the supplementation or
refund in currency or in the form of use as a tax credit, in relation,
respectively, to amounts paid short or in excess.       (Included by Complementary
Law No. 44, of 1983)

Art 4 In
substitution for the system referred to in the preceding article, the States may provide that the
tax due result from the difference to the greater between the amount of tax relating to the
operation to be taxed and that paid on the preceding levy on the same goods, in the
following cases:

I - Departure, from
wholesale commercial establishments or from cooperatives for processing and joint sale, of
agricultural products "in natura" or simply processed;

II - Operations
of street vendors and of establishments of transitory existence.

Art 5 The rate of the tax on the circulation of goods shall be uniform for
all goods; the Federal Senate, through a resolution adopted on the
initiative of the President of the Republic, shall set the maximum rates for
internal operations, for interstate operations and for operations of
export abroad.

Sole paragraph. The limit referred to in this article shall replace the
State rate, when the latter is higher.

Art 6 The taxpayer of the tax is the merchant, industrial party or producer who effects the
departure of the goods, the one who imports them from abroad or the one who wins them at auction or acquires,
in bidding promoted by the Public Authority, imported and seized goods.

§ 1
The following are also considered taxpayers:

I - Civil
companies for economic purposes, including cooperatives that habitually engage in
operations relating to the circulation of goods;

II - Civil
companies for non-economic purposes that operate industrial establishments or that
habitually engage in the sale of goods acquired for that purpose;

III - Bodies
of the direct public administration, autonomous agencies and public
companies, federal, state or municipal, that sell, even if only to buyers of a
given professional or functional category, goods that, for that purpose,
they acquire or produce.

§ 2 The
States may consider as an autonomous taxpayer each commercial,
industrial or producing establishment, permanent or temporary, of the taxpayer, including vehicles
used by the latter in street trading.

 § 3 The provision of § 1, item III does not apply to the
National Superintendence of Supply.
(Revoked by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

§ 3 - State law may
  attribute responsible party status:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of 1983)

a) to the manufacturer,
  merchant or other category of taxpayer, regarding the tax due on the operation or
  operations prior thereto carried out with the goods or their inputs;
(Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of
  1983)

b) to the producer,
  manufacturer or wholesale merchant, regarding the tax due by the retail merchant;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of
  1983)

c) to the producer or
  manufacturer, regarding the tax due by the wholesale merchant and by the retail
  merchant;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of 1983)

d) to carriers,
  depositaries and others in charge of the custody or marketing of goods.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of
  1983)

§ 4 - If the
  responsible party and the substituted taxpayer are established in different States, the
  substitution shall depend on an agreement between the States concerned.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 44, of
  1983)

Art 7 In
shipments of goods out of the State, the issuance of a second tax
document, in the form established by decree of the federal Executive Power, shall be mandatory.

Art 8 The tax, within the competence of the Municipalities, on services of any
nature, has as its taxable event the provision, by a company or self-employed professional, with
or without a fixed establishment, of a service listed in the attached list.      (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

§ 1 Services included in the list are
subject only to the tax provided for in this article, even if their provision involves the
supply of goods.       (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

§ 2 Services not specified in the list
and whose provision involves the supply of goods are subject to the tax on the
circulation of goods.       (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

§ 2 The supply of
goods together with the provision of services not specified in the list is subject to the
tax on the circulation of goods.       (Wording given
by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)        (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

Art 9 The tax base is the price
of the service.

§ 1 When it is a
matter of the provision of services in the form of the taxpayer's own personal
work, the tax shall be calculated, by means of fixed or variable rates, based
on the nature of the service or other pertinent factors, not including in these
the amount paid as remuneration for the work itself.

§ 2
In the execution of hydraulic works or civil construction, the tax shall be calculated
on the price minus the portions corresponding to:

a) the value of materials acquired from
third parties, when supplied by the service provider;

b) the value of subcontracts already
taxed by the tax.

§ 2 In the provision of the services referred to
in items 19 and 20 of the attached list, the tax shall be calculated on the price minus the
corresponding portions:     (Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

a)
the value of materials supplied by the service provider;
(Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

b)
the value of subcontracts already taxed by the tax.
(Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

3. When the services referred to in items I, III, IV (only industrial
property agents), V and VII of the attached list are rendered by companies,
these shall be subject to the tax in the form of § 1, calculated in relation to each
qualified professional, partner, employee or not, who renders services in the name of the
company while assuming personal responsibility, under the terms of the applicable
law.

§
3 When the services referred to in items 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 11, 12 and 17 of the attached
list are rendered by companies, these shall be subject to the tax in the form of §
1, calculated in relation to each qualified professional, partner, employee or not, who
renders the service in the name of the company, while assuming personal responsibility, under
the terms of the applicable law.       (Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

 § 3 When the services referred to in items 1, 4, 8, 25, 52,
88, 89, 90, 91 and 92 of the attached list are rendered by companies, these shall be subject
to the tax in the form of § 1, calculated in relation to each qualified professional,
partner, employee or not, who renders services in the name of the company, while assuming
personal responsibility, under the terms of the applicable law.      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 56, of
1987)

§ 4
In the provision of the service referred to in item 101 of the Attached List, the tax is
calculated on the portion of the price corresponding to the direct proportion of the
length of the highway operated, within the territory of the Municipality, or of half the length of a
bridge that joins two Municipalities.     (Included by Complementary Law No.
100, of 1999)

§ 5 The tax
base determined under the terms of the preceding paragraph:     (Included by
Complementary Law No. 100, of 1999)

I - is reduced, in Municipalities where
there is no toll collection point, to sixty percent of its value;
(Included by Complementary
Law No. 100, of 1999)

II – is increased, in Municipalities
where there is a toll collection point, by the addition necessary for it to be complete
in relation to the highway operated.
(Included by Complementary
Law No. 100, of 1999)

§ 6 For purposes of
the provision of §§ 4 and 5, the highway
operated is considered to be the stretch bounded by the points equidistant between each toll collection
point, or between the nearest of them and the initial or terminal point of the highway.     (Included by
Complementary Law No. 100, of 1999)

Art 10. The taxpayer is the service provider.       (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

Sole paragraph. Not considered taxpayers are those
who render services under an employment relationship, casual workers, directors and
members of advisory or supervisory boards of companies.

Art 11. Exempt from the tax is the
execution, by administration or contract, of hydraulic works or civil
construction contracted with the Union, States, the Federal District and Municipalities, autonomous agencies and
public service concessionary companies, as well as the respective
subcontracts.

 Art. 11 - The execution, by administration,
contract and subcontract, of hydraulic works or civil construction and the
respective consulting engineering services, when contracted with the Union, States,
the Federal District, Municipalities, Autonomous Agencies and public service
concessionary companies, are exempt from the tax referred to in art. 8.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 22, of 1974)      (Revoked by Complementary
Law No. 116, of 2003)

Sole paragraph - The consulting engineering services referred to in this article are
the following:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 22, of 1974)

I - preparation of master plans,
feasibility studies, organizational studies and others, related to engineering works and
services;     (Included by Complementary
Law No. 22, of 1974)

II - preparation of preliminary studies, basic projects and executive projects for engineering
works;     (Included by Complementary Law No.
22, of 1974)

III - inspection and supervision of engineering works and services.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 22, of
1974)

Art 12.
The place of provision of the service is considered to be      (Revoked by Complementary
Law No. 116, of 2003)

a) that of the providing establishment or, in the absence
of an establishment, the domicile of the provider;

b) in the case of civil construction, the place where
the provision is carried out.

c) in the case of the service referred to in item
101 of the Attached List, the Municipality within whose territory a portion of the road operated is located.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 100, of
1999)

 Art
13. Articles 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 71, 72 and
73 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25
of 1966, with its subsequent amendments, are hereby revoked, as well as all other
provisions to the contrary.

Art 14. This
Decree-law shall enter into force on January 1, 1969.

Brasília, December 31,
1968; 147th of Independence and 80th of the Republic.

A.COSTA E SILVA

Antonio Delfin Netto

This text does not
replace that published in the DOU of 12.31.1968,
rectified on
1.9.1969 and
2.4.1969

List of Services

I - Physicians, dentists, veterinarians, nurses, prosthetists, orthopedists,
physiotherapists and the like; laboratories of analysis, radiography or
radioscopy, medical electricity and the like;

II - Hospitals, sanatoriums, outpatient clinics, emergency rooms, blood banks,
nursing homes, recovery or rest homes, asylums and the like;

III - Lawyers, solicitors and provisional practitioners;

IV - Industrial, artistic or literary property agents, customs agents,
private experts and appraisers, sworn translators and interpreters and
the like;

V - Engineers, architects, urban planners, designers, calculators, technical
draftsmen, landscape decorators and the like;

VI - Services, by administration, contract or subcontract, of civil
construction, earthmoving, demolition, upkeep and repair of buildings, roads,
bridges and other engineering works, including hydraulic works, auxiliary
services and the like;

VII - Accountants, auditors, economists, bookkeepers, accounting
technicians;

VIII - Barbers, hairdressers, manicurists, pedicurists and the like; beauty
institutes and the like; establishments for showers, massages, gymnastics, baths
and the like;

IX - Urban or rural transport services of cargo or passengers,
strictly of a municipal nature;

X - Public entertainment services.

a) theaters, cinemas, circuses, auditoriums, amusement parks, exhibitions with
admission charge, and the like, of a permanent or temporary nature;

b) billiards, bowling alleys and other permitted games, except the supply, on the
premises, of beverages, food and other goods, which are subject to the tax
on the circulation of goods;

c) cabarets, night clubs, dancings, boites and the like; the
supply on the premises of beverages, food and other goods, which is
subject to the tax on the circulation of goods;

d) dances and other public gatherings, with or without admission charge;

e) sporting competitions or of physical or intellectual skill, with or without
admission charge or spectator participation, including those held in
auditoriums of radio or television stations and the like;

f) performance of music, by individual or group performers, or
transmitted by mechanical, electrical or electronic process;

XI - Tourism agencies, sightseeing and excursions; tourist guides and interpreters.

XII - Agency, brokerage or intermediation of insurance, of exchange, of the purchase
and sale of movable or immovable property, of personal services of any nature, and
any similar or related activities, except the agency, brokerage
or intermediation of securities carried out by institutions
that depend on federal authorization.

XIII - Organization, programming, planning and technical, financial
or administrative consultancy, appraisal of goods, risks or damages; technical
analysis laboratory; data processing; similar and related services.

XIV - Organization of trade fairs, congresses and similar meetings.

XV - Advertising and publicity, including the planning of campaigns or regular
publicity systems, the preparation of designs, texts and other
advertising material (except its printing, reproduction or manufacture) and the disclosure of
such designs, texts or other advertising materials by any means apt to
make them accessible to the public, including by means of telephone,
radio or television transmission, and their insertion in newspapers, periodicals or books;

XVI - Typing, stenography, secretarial work and the like;

XVII - Preparation, copying or reproduction of plans, drawings and documents;

XVIII - Rental of space in movable property;

XIX - Rental of space in immovable property for lodging purposes;

XX - General warehouses, cold storage warehouses, silos, deposits of any
nature, furniture storage and related services; loading, unloading,
arrangement and custody services for stored goods.

XXI - Lodging in hotels, boarding houses and the like, except the supply of
food, beverages and other goods when not included in the price of the
daily rate or monthly fee.

XXII - Administration of property or business;

XXIII - Lubrication, upkeep and maintenance.

XXIV - Cleaning companies.

XXV - Teaching of any grade or nature.

XXVI - Tailors, seamstresses or the like, when the material, except
trimmings, is supplied by the user of the service.

XXVII - Dyeing and laundering.

XXVIII - Photographic and cinematographic studios, including developing,
enlarging, photographic copies; photolithography;

XXIX - Sale of lottery tickets.

LISTS OF SERVICES

(Wording given by Decree-Law No. 834, of 1969)

Services of:

1. Physicians, dentists and veterinarians.

2. Nurses, prosthetists (dental
prosthesis), obstetricians, orthoptists, speech therapists, psychologists.

3. Clinical analysis and
medical electricity laboratories.

4. Hospitals, sanatoriums, outpatient clinics,
emergency rooms, blood banks, nursing homes, recovery or rest homes under
medical guidance.

5. Lawyers or provisional practitioners.

6. Industrial property agents.

7. Artistic or
literary property agents.

8. Experts and appraisers.

9. Translators and interpreters.

10. Customs agents.

11. Economists.

12. Accountants, auditors, bookkeepers and
accounting technicians.

13. Organization, programming, planning,
advisory services, data processing, technical, financial or administrative consulting
(except technical assistance services rendered to third parties concerning a branch
of industry or commerce operated by the service provider).

14. Typing, stenography, secretarial work and
office duties.

15. Administration of property or business,
including consortiums or mutual funds for the acquisition of property (not covering
services performed by financial institutions).

16. Recruitment, placement or supply
of labor, including by employees of the service provider or by casual
workers hired by it.

17. Engineers, architects, urban planners.

18. Designers, calculators, technical
draftsmen.

19. Execution, by administration, contract
or subcontract, of civil construction, hydraulic works and other similar works,
including auxiliary or complementary services (except the supply of goods
produced by the service provider, outside the place of provision of the services, which
are subject to the ICM).

20. Demolition; upkeep and repair of
buildings (including elevators installed in them), roads, bridges and the like
(except the supply of goods produced by the service provider, outside the
place of provision of the services, which are subject to the ICM).

21. Cleaning of buildings.

22. Scraping and polishing of floors.

23. Disinfection and sanitation.

24. Polishing of movable property (when the
service is rendered to the final user of the polished object).

25. Barbers, hairdressers, manicurists,
pedicurists, skin treatment and other beauty salon services.

26. Baths, showers, massages, gymnastics and
the like.

27. Transport and communications, of a
strictly municipal nature.

28. Public entertainment:

a) theaters, cinemas, circuses, auditoriums,
amusement parks, taxi-
dancings and the like;

b) exhibitions with admission charge;

c) billiards, bowling alleys and other permitted
games;

 d) dances, "shows", festivals, recitals and the like;

e) sporting competitions or of physical or
intellectual skill, with or without spectator participation, including those held
in auditoriums of radio or television stations;

f) performance of music, individually or
by groups;

g) supply of music by
transmission, by any process.

 29. Organization of parties; "buffet"
(except the supply of food and beverages, which are
subject to the ICM).

30. Tourism agencies, sightseeing and
excursions, tourist guides.

31. Intermediation, including brokerage, of
movable and immovable property, except the services mentioned in items 58 and 59.

32. Agency and representation of any
nature, not included in the preceding item and in items 58 and 59.

33. Technical analyses.

34. Organization of trade fairs,
congresses and the like.

35. Advertising and publicity, including
the planning of campaigns or publicity systems; preparation of designs, texts and
other advertising materials; disclosure of texts, designs and other publicity
materials, by any means.

36. General warehouses, cold storage warehouses and
silos; loading, unloading, arrangement and custody of goods, including furniture storage
and related services.

37. Deposits of any nature (except
deposits made in banks or other financial institutions).

38. Custody and parking of vehicles.

39. Lodging in hotels, boarding houses and
the like (the value of food, when included in the price of the
daily rate or monthly fee, is subject to the tax on services).

40. Lubrication, cleaning and servicing of
machines, apparatus and equipment (when the servicing involves repair or
replacement of parts, item 41 applies).

41. Repair and restoration of any
objects (excluding, in any case, the supply of parts and components of machines and
apparatus, whose value is subject to the tax on the circulation of goods).

42. Reconditioning of motors (the value of
parts supplied by the service provider is subject to the tax on the circulation of
goods).

43. Painting (except services related
to immovable property) of objects not intended for sale or industrialization.

44. Teaching of any grade or nature.

45. Tailors, dressmakers, seamstresses, rendered
to the final user, when the material, except trimmings, is supplied by the user.

46. Dyeing and laundering.

47. Processing, washing, drying,
dyeing, electroplating, packaging and similar operations, of objects not
intended for sale or industrialization.

48. Installation and assembly of apparatus,
machines and equipment rendered to the final user of the service, exclusively with
material supplied by the latter (this covers rendering the service to the public authority,
to autonomous agencies, to electric power generation concessionary companies).

49. Installation of carpets and curtains with
material supplied by the final user of the service.

50. Photographic and
cinematographic studios, including developing, enlarging, copying and
reproduction; "video-tape" recording studios for television; phonographic and
sound or noise recording studios, including dubbing and sound "mixing."

51. Copying of documents and other papers,
plans and drawings, by any process not included in the preceding item.

52. Rental of movable property.

53. Graphic composition, cliché-making,
zincography, lithography and photolithography.

54. Custody, treatment and training of
animals.

55. Forestation and reforestation.

56. Landscaping and decoration (except the material
supplied for execution, which is subject to the ICM).

57. Retreading or regeneration of
tires.

58. Agency, brokerage or intermediation
of exchange and insurance.

59. Agency, brokerage or intermediation
of any securities (except services performed by financial institutions,
securities distributing companies and brokerage firms, regularly
authorized to operate).

60. Binding of books and magazines.

61. Aerial photogrammetry.

62. Collections, including of copyright.

63. Distribution of cinematographic films
and of "video-tapes."

64. Distribution and sale of lottery
tickets.

65. Funeral companies.

66. Taxidermist.

  67 - Public
Relations professionals. (Included by Law No. 7,192, of 1984)

 LIST OF SERVICES

 (Wording
given by Complementary Law No. 56, of 1987)

(See Complementary Law No. 116, of 2003)

1. Physicians, including clinical analysis, medical electricity, radiotherapy,
ultrasonography, radiology, tomography and the like;

2. Hospitals, clinics, sanatoriums, analysis laboratories, outpatient clinics,
emergency rooms, mental hospitals, nursing homes, rest homes, recovery homes and
the like;

3. Blood, milk, skin, eye, semen banks and the like;

4. Nurses, obstetricians, orthoptists, speech therapists, prosthetists (dental prosthesis);

5. Medical assistance and the like, provided for in items 1, 2 and 3 of this
list, rendered through group medical plans, agreements, including with companies,
for the assistance of employees;

6. Health plans, rendered by a company not included in item V of this
list and fulfilled through services rendered by third parties, contracted by the
company or merely paid by it, upon indication of the beneficiary of the plan;

7.
(Vetoed)

8. Veterinary physicians;

9. Veterinary hospitals, veterinary clinics and the like;

10. Custody, treatment, training, taming, grooming, boarding and
the like, relating to animals;

11. Barbers, hairdressers, manicurists, pedicurists, skin treatment, depilation and
the like; 12. Baths, showers, sauna, massages, gymnastics and the like;

13. Sweeping, collection, removal and incineration of garbage;

14. Cleaning and dredging of ports, rivers and canals;

15. Cleaning, maintenance and upkeep of immovable property, including public roads, parks and
gardens; 16. Disinfection, immunization, sanitation, deratization and the like;

17. Control and treatment of effluents of any nature, and of physical and
biological agents;

18. Incineration of any residues;

19. Chimney cleaning;

20. Environmental sanitation and the like;

21. Technical assistance
(Vetoed);

22. Advisory or consulting services of any nature, not contained in other items of this
list, organization, programming, planning, advisory services, data processing,
technical, financial or administrative consulting
(Vetoed);

23. Planning, coordination, programming or technical, financial or
administrative organization
(Vetoed);

24. Analyses, including of systems, examinations, research and information, collection and
processing of data of any nature;

25. Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping, accounting technicians and the like;

26. Expert opinions, reports, technical examinations and technical analyses;

27. Translations and interpretations;

28. Appraisal of property;

29. Typing, stenography, office duties, general secretarial work and the like;

30. Projects, calculations and technical drawings of any nature;

31. Aerial photogrammetry (including interpretation), mapping and topography;

32. Execution by administration, contract or subcontract, of civil construction, of
hydraulic works and other similar works and the respective consulting engineering,
including auxiliary or complementary services (except the supply of goods
produced by the service provider, outside the place of provision of the services, which
is subject to the ICM);

33. Demolition;

34. Repair, upkeep and renovation of buildings, roads, bridges, ports and
the like (except the supply of goods produced by the service provider
outside the place of provision of the services, which is subject to the ICM);

35. Research, drilling, cementing, well logging,
(Vetoed), stimulation and other
services related to the exploration and exploitation of petroleum and natural gas;

36. Forestation and reforestation;

37. Shoring and containment of slopes and related services;

38. Landscaping, gardening and decoration (except the supply of goods, which is
subject to the ICM);

39. Scraping, caulking, polishing, finishing of floors, walls and partitions;

40. Teaching, instruction, training, assessment of knowledge, of any grade or
nature; 41. Planning, organization and administration of fairs, exhibitions,
congresses and the like;

42. Organization of parties and receptions: "buffet" (except the supply of
food and beverages, which is subject to the ICM);

43. Administration of property and business of third parties and of a consortium
(Vetoed);

44. Administration of mutual funds (except that performed by institutions authorized to
operate by the Central Bank);

45. Agency, brokerage or intermediation of exchange, of insurance and of private
pension plans;

46. Agency, brokerage or intermediation of any securities (except services
performed by institutions authorized to operate by the Central Bank);

47. Agency, brokerage or intermediation of industrial, artistic or literary
property rights;

48. Agency, brokerage or intermediation of franchise contracts
and of factoring contracts (excepted are services rendered by institutions
authorized to operate by the Central Bank);

49. Agency, organization, promotion and execution of tourism programs,
sightseeing, excursions, tourist guides and the like;

50. Agency, brokerage, or intermediation of movable and immovable property not
covered by items 45, 46, 47 and 48;

51. Customs agents;

52. Industrial property agents;

53. Artistic or literary property agents;

54. Auction;

55. Adjustment of claims covered by insurance contracts; inspection and appraisal
of risks for coverage of insurance contracts; prevention and management of insurable
risks, rendered by someone who is not the insured party itself or the insurance company;

56. Storage, deposit, loading, unloading, arrangement and custody of goods of any
kind (except deposits made in financial institutions authorized to operate
by the Central Bank);

57. Custody and parking of land motor vehicles;

58. Surveillance or security of persons and property;

59. Transport, collection, remittance or delivery of goods or valuables, within the territory of the
municipality;

60. Public entertainment:

a)
(Vetoed), cinemas,
(Vetoed), taxi dancings and the like;

b) billiards, bowling alleys, animal races and other games;

c) exhibitions, with admission charge;

d) dances, shows, festivals, recitals and the like, including spectacles that
are also transmitted, upon purchase of rights therefor, by television or
by radio;

e) electronic games;

f) sporting competitions or of physical or intellectual skill with or without the
participation of the spectator, including the sale of transmission rights by radio or
by television;

g) performance of music, individually or by groups
(Vetoed);

61. Distribution and sale of lottery tickets, cards, pools or betting coupons,
raffles or prizes;

62. Supply of music, by transmission by any process, for public
thoroughfares or enclosed environments (except radio or television transmissions);

63. Recording and distribution of films and "video-tapes";

64. Phonography or recording of sounds or noises, including trick recording, dubbing and sound
mixing;

65. Photography and cinematography, including developing, enlarging, copying, reproduction
and trick photography;

66. Production, for third parties, whether or not commissioned in advance, of spectacles,
interviews and the like;

67. Installation of carpets and curtains, with material supplied by the final user of the
service;

68. Lubrication, cleaning and servicing of machines, vehicles, apparatus and equipment
(except the supply of parts and components, which is subject to the ICM);

69. Repair, restoration, maintenance and upkeep of machines, vehicles,
motors, elevators or any objects (except supply of parts and components, which
is subject to the ICM);

70. Reconditioning of motors (the value of parts supplied by the service provider
is subject to the ICM);

71. Retreading or regeneration of tires for the final user;

72. Reconditioning, packaging, painting, processing, washing, drying,
dyeing, electroplating, anodizing, cutting, trimming, polishing, laminating and
the like, of objects not intended for industrialization or sale;

73. Polishing of movable property when the service is rendered for the final user of the
polished object;

74. Installation and assembly of apparatus, machines and equipment, rendered to the final
user of the service, exclusively with material supplied by the latter;

75. Industrial assembly, rendered to the final user of the service, exclusively with
material supplied by the latter;

76. Copying or reproduction, by any process, of documents and other papers,
plans or drawings;

77. Graphic composition, phototypesetting, cliché-making, zincography, lithography and
photolithography;

78. Placement of frames and the like, binding, engraving and gilding of books,
magazines and the like;

79. Rental of movable property, including finance leasing;

80. Funerals;

81. Tailoring and sewing, when the material is supplied by the final user, except
trimmings;

82. Dyeing and laundering;

83. Taxidermy;

84. Recruitment, agency, selection, placement or supply of labor,
even on a temporary basis, including by employees of the service provider or by
casual workers hired by it;

85. Advertising and publicity, including sales promotion, planning of campaigns or
publicity systems, preparation of designs, texts and other advertising
materials (except its printing, reproduction or manufacture);

86. Conveyance and disclosure of texts, designs and other publicity materials, by
any means (except in newspapers, periodicals, radio, and television);

87. Port and airport services; use of a port or airport;
docking; stevedoring; internal, external and special warehousing; supply of water,
ancillary services; movement of goods outside the wharf;

88. Lawyers;

89. Engineers, architects, urban planners, agronomists;

90. Dentists;

91. Economists;

92. Psychologists;

93. Social workers;

94. Public relations;

95. Collections and receipts on behalf of third parties, including copyright,
protest of instruments, suspension of protests, return of unpaid instruments,
maintenance of overdue instruments, provision of collection or receipt status
and other related collection or receipt services (this item also covers
services rendered by institutions authorized to operate by the Central Bank);

96. Financial institutions authorized to operate by the Central Bank: supply of
checkbooks; issuance of cashier's checks; transfer of funds;
return of checks; stop payment of checks; payment and credit
orders, by any means; issuance and renewal of magnetic cards; inquiries at
electronic terminals; payments on behalf of third parties, including those made outside
the establishment; preparation of registration forms; safe deposit box rental; supply of a
duplicate of statement entry notices; issuance of installment booklets (this item
does not cover reimbursement, to financial institutions, of expenses for postal
charges, telegrams, telex and teleprocessing, necessary for the rendering of the
services);

97. Transport of a strictly municipal nature;

98. Telephone communications from one apparatus to another within the same municipality;

99. Lodging in hotels, motels, boarding houses and the like (the value of food,
when included in the price of the daily rate, is subject to the Tax on Services);

100.
Distribution of third-party goods in representation of any nature;

101. Operation of a highway upon charging a price to
users, involving the execution of maintenance, upkeep,
improvement services for the adequacy of capacity and traffic safety, operation,
monitoring, assistance to users and others defined in contracts, concession or
permission acts or in official regulations.       (Included
by Complementary Law No. 100, of 1999)

*

