

Lcp 123

    Presidency
    of the Republic

    Casa Civil

    Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicos

COMPLEMENTARY LAW No. 123, OF
DECEMBER 14 OF
2006

(Republication
in compliance with the provisions of art. 5 of Complementary Law No.
139, of November 10, 2011.)

	Veto message

	Effective date

	(See Decreto nº 8.538,
	of 2015)

	(See Complementary Law No. 168,
	of 2019)
	(See Complementary
	Law No. 214, of 2025)  Pending effects
	(See Complementary
	Law No. 214, of 2025)  Pending effects
	(See Complementary
	Law No. 227, of 2026)  Pending effects

	Establishes the
	National Statute for Microenterprises and Small Businesses; amends
	provisions of Laws No. 8.212 and 8.213, both of July 24,
	1991, of the Consolidation of Labor Laws - CLT, approved by
	Decree-Law No. 5.452, of May 1st,
	1943, of Law No. 10.189, of February 14, 2001, of Complementary
	Law No. 63, of January 11, 1990; and repeals the
	Laws No. 9.317, of December 5, 1996, and 9.841, of
	October 5, 1999.

THE
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC I make known that the National Congress decrees and I
sanction the following Complementary Law:

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

Art. 1  This
Complementary Law establishes general rules regarding the differentiated and
favored treatment to be given to microenterprises and small businesses within
the scope of the Powers of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities,
especially with regard to:

I - the assessment and
collection of taxes and contributions of the Union, the States, the Federal
District, and the Municipalities, by means of a single collection regime, including
ancillary obligations;

II - compliance with
labor and social security obligations, including ancillary obligations;

III - access to credit
and to the market, including preference in the acquisition of goods and services
by the Public Authorities, to technology, to associativism and to the
inclusion rules.

IV - the single national taxpayer registry referred to
in item IV of the sole paragraph of
art. 146, in fine, of the
Federal Constitution.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

				IV - the single national taxpayer
		registry referred to in
				item IV of § 1 of art. 146 of the
		Federal Constitution.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

§ 1  It is
incumbent upon the Management Committee of Simples Nacional (CGSN) to assess the need for revision, as
of January 1, 2015, of the amounts expressed in
currency in this Complementary Law.

§ 2
(VETOED).

§ 3
 Except as provided in Chapter IV, any new obligation affecting
microenterprises and small businesses must present, in the instrument that
instituted it, a specification of the differentiated, simplified and favored treatment
for compliance.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4
 In the specification of the differentiated, simplified and favored treatment referred to
in § 3, a maximum term must be stated, when additional
procedures are necessary, for the inspecting bodies to comply with
the measures necessary for the issuance of documents, the carrying out of inspections and
the fulfillment of demands made by microenterprises and small
businesses with the objective of complying with the new obligation.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 5
 Should the inspecting body fail to comply with the terms established in the specification of the
differentiated and favored treatment, as provided in § 4,
the new obligation shall be unenforceable until a guidance inspection
visit is carried out and the term for regularization is restarted.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 6
 The absence of a specification of the differentiated, simplified and
favored treatment or of the determination of maximum terms, in accordance with §§ 3
and 4, shall render the new obligation unenforceable for
microenterprises and small businesses.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 7
 Failure to observe the provisions of §§ 3 to 6
shall result in an infringement of the legal rights and guarantees assured to the professional
exercise of business activity.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 2  The
differentiated and favored treatment to be given to microenterprises and
small businesses referred to in art. 1 of this Complementary Law
shall be managed by the bodies specified below:

I - Management Committee of
Simples Nacional, linked to the Ministry of Finance, composed of 4 (four)
representatives of the Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of Brazil, as representatives
of the Union, 2 (two) of the States and the Federal District, and 2 (two) of the Municipalities,
to deal with tax matters; and

I - Management Committee of Simples Nacional, linked to the
Ministry of the Economy, composed of 4 (four) representatives of the Union, 2 (two)
of the States and the Federal District, 2 (two) of the Municipalities, 1 (one) of the Brazilian
Micro and Small Business Support Service
(Sebrae) and 1 (one) of the national confederations representing the segment of microenterprises and small
businesses referred to in art. 11 of Complementary Law No. 147, of August 7,
2014, to deal with tax matters;
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

				I - Management Committee of Simples Nacional,
		linked to the Ministry of Finance, composed of 4 (four)
		representatives of the Union, 2 (two) of the States and the Federal District, 2
		(two) of the Municipalities, 1 (one) of the Brazilian Service to Support Micro and
		Small Businesses (Sebrae) and 1 (one) of the national
		confederations representing the segment of microenterprises and small businesses
		referred to in art. 11 of Complementary Law No. 147, of August 7, 2014,
		to deal with tax matters;
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

II - Permanent Forum of the
Microenterprises and Small Businesses, with the participation of the
competent federal bodies and of the entities linked to the sector, to deal with the other
matters, except as provided in item III of the caput of this article;

III - Committee for the Management
of the National Network for the Simplification of the Registration and Legalization of Businesses and
Companies, linked to the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign
Trade, composed of representatives of the Union, of the States and of the Federal
District, of the Municipalities and other support and business registration bodies, in the
manner defined by the Executive Branch, to deal with the process of registration and
legalization of entrepreneurs and legal entities.

III - Committee for the Management of the National Network for the
Simplification of the Registration and Legalization of Businesses and Companies - CGSIM,
linked to the Secretariat of Micro and Small Business of the Presidency of the Republic,
composed of representatives of the Union, of the States and of the Federal District, of the
Municipalities and other support and business registration bodies, in the manner defined
by the Executive Branch, to deal with the process of registration and legalization of
entrepreneurs and legal entities.    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

				III - Committee for the Integration of the
		Tax Administrations and Management of the National Network for the Simplification
		of the Registration and Legalization of Businesses and Companies - CGSIM, linked
		to the Ministry of Finance, composed of representatives of the Union, States,
		Municipalities and the Federal District and other support and registration bodies, in the
		manner defined by the Executive Branch, to deal with tax registration acts
		and with the process of registration and legalization of entrepreneurs and
		legal entities.
				(Wording
				given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effects

§ 1º  The Committees
referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article shall be presided over and
coordinated by representatives of the Union.

§ 2º  The
representatives of the States and of the Federal District on the Committees referred to in
items I and III of the caput of this article shall be appointed by the National Council
for Tax Policy - CONFAZ, and those of the Municipalities shall be appointed, one
by the entity representing the Finance Secretariats of the Capital cities, and another
by the entities of national representation of the Brazilian Municipalities.

§ 3º  The representative
entities referred to in item III of the caput and in § 2º of this
article shall be those duly constituted at least 1 (one) year before the
publication of this Complementary Law.

§ 4º  The Committees
referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article shall prepare their
internal rules of procedure by resolution.

§ 4º The committees referred to in items I and III of the
caput
of this article shall prepare their internal rules of procedure by resolution, observing,
with regard to the CGSN, the provisions of §§ 4º-A and 4º-B of this article.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

§ 4º-A. The minimum quorum for holding CGSN meetings
shall be 3/4 (three quarters) of the members, one of whom shall
necessarily be the Chair.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

				§ 4º-A. The minimum quorum for holding
		CGSN meetings shall be 3/4 (three quarters) of the members, one of
		whom shall necessarily be the Chair or his/her substitute.
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

§ 4º-B. The CGSN's deliberations shall be taken by 3/4 (three
quarters) of the members present at the meetings, in person or virtual,
except for decisions determining the exclusion of occupations authorized to
act as Individual Microentrepreneur (MEI), when the deliberation
must be unanimous.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

§ 5
The Forum referred to in item II of the caput of this article, whose
purpose is to guide and advise the formulation and coordination of the national
policy for the development of microenterprises and small businesses, as well as
to monitor and evaluate its implementation, shall be presided over and coordinated by the
Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade.

		§ 5
		 The Forum referred to in item II of the
		caput of this
article has the purpose of guiding and advising the formulation and coordination of the
national policy for the development of microenterprises and small businesses, as well as
monitoring and evaluating its implementation, being presided over and
coordinated by the Secretariat of Micro and Small Business of the Presidency of the
Republic.
(Wording given by Law No.
12.792, of 2013)

§
6º  To the
Committee referred to in item I of the caput
of this article it is incumbent to regulate the option, exclusion, taxation, inspection,
collection, charging, active debt, remittance and other items relating to the
regime referred to in art. 12 of this Complementary Law, observing the other
provisions of this Complementary Law.

§ 7º  To the Committee
referred to in item III of the caput of this article it is incumbent, in the manner of the law,
to regulate registration, filing, opening, permit, filing, licenses,
authorization, records and other items relating to the opening,
legalization and operation of entrepreneurs and legal entities of any
size, economic activity or corporate composition.

§ 8º  The members
of the Committees referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article shall be
appointed, respectively, by the Ministers of State of Finance and of
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, upon nomination by the linked bodies and
entities.

§ 8  The members of the Committees referred to in
items I and III of the caput of this article shall be appointed, respectively,
by the Ministers of State of Finance and of the Secretariat of Micro and Small Business
of the Presidency of the Republic, upon nomination by the linked bodies and
entities.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 8º The members of the committees referred to in items I and III
of the
caput
of this article shall be appointed by the Minister of State of the Economy, upon
nomination by the linked bodies and entities.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

				§ 8º The members of the CGSN and of the CGSIM shall be
		appointed by the Minister of State of Finance, upon nomination by the
		linked bodies and entities.
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

§ 8º-A. Of the Union members composing the committee referred
to in item I of the
caput
of this article, 3 (three) shall be representatives of the Special Secretariat of the Federal
Revenue of Brazil and 1 (one) of the Undersecretariat for the Development of Micro and
Small Businesses, Entrepreneurship and Handicraft of the Special Secretariat for
Productivity and Competitiveness, or of the body that comes to replace it.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

				§ 8º-A. Of the Union members composing the
		CGSN, 3 (three) shall be representatives of the Special Secretariat of the Federal
		Revenue of Brazil and 1 (one) of the Ministry of Entrepreneurship, of
		Microenterprise and of Small Business, or of the body that comes to
		replace it.
				(Wording given
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effects

§ 8º-B. The seat of the national confederations representing
the segment of microenterprises and small businesses on the committee referred to
in item I of the
caput
of this article shall be occupied under an annual rotation regime among the confederations.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

§ 9  The CGSN may determine, with respect to the microenterprise and
small business opting for Simples Nacional, the form, periodicity
and term:   (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

I - for delivery to the Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of Brazil - RFB of a single
declaration with data related to taxable events, tax base and amounts
of the contribution to Social Security due on labor remuneration,
including amounts withheld from workers in the company's service, of the Severance
Pay Fund - FGTS, and other information of interest to the
Ministry of Labor and Employment - MTE, the National Social Security Institute -
INSS, and the FGTS Curator Council, observing the provisions of § 7
of this article; and
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - for the collection of the contributions described in item I and of the FGTS.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 10.  The collection referred to in item II of § 9 of this
article may be done in a unified manner with respect to the taxes assessed under
Simples Nacional.   (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 11.  The delivery of the declaration referred to in item I of § 9
shall replace, in the manner regulated by the CGSN, the requirement to deliver
all information, forms and declarations to which the other
companies or equivalent entities that hire workers are subject, including with respect to the
collection of FGTS, the Annual Social Information Report, and the General
Register of Employed and Unemployed Persons.   (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 12.  In the event of collection of the FGTS in the manner of item II of § 9
of this article, the transfer of the funds and of the identifying
elements of the collection to the manager of that fund must be ensured, for credit to the
worker's linked account.  (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 13.  The document referred to in item I of § 9 has a
declaratory character, constituting a suitable and sufficient instrument for the collection
of taxes, contributions and land debts that have not been paid,
resulting from the information provided therein.   (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

CHAPTER II

ON THE
DEFINITION OF MICROENTERPRISE AND SMALL BUSINESS

Art. 3º For
the purposes of this Complementary Law, business companies, simple companies, individual
limited liability companies, and the entrepreneur referred to in

art. 966 of Law No. 10.406, of January 10, 2002 (Civil Code), duly registered in the
Registry of Commercial Companies or in the Civil Registry of Legal Entities,
as the case may be, shall be considered microenterprises or small businesses, provided that:

I - in the case of a
microenterprise, it earns, in each calendar year, gross revenue equal to or less than
R$ 360,000.00 (three hundred and sixty thousand reais); and

II - in the case of a small
business, it earns, in each calendar year, gross revenue greater than R$
360,000.00 (three hundred and sixty thousand reais) and equal to or less than R$
3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais).

II -
in the case
of a
small
business, it earns,
in
each
calendar year, gross
revenue greater than R$
360,000.00
(three hundred
and sixty thousand reais)
and equal to or
less
than R$
4,800,000.00 (four
million
and
eight hundred
thousand reais).  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 1º
Gross revenue, for the purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article, is considered to be
the proceeds from the sale of goods and services in own-account operations, the price
of services rendered, and the result of operations on behalf of third parties, not
including cancelled sales and unconditional discounts granted.

				§ 1º Gross revenue is considered, for purposes
		of the provisions of the caput, to be the proceeds from the sale of goods and
		services in own-account operations, the price of services rendered,
		the result of operations on behalf of third parties, and the other revenues of the
		activity or main purpose of the microenterprises or small
		businesses, not including cancelled sales and unconditional
		discounts granted.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

§ 2º
In the case of commencement of activity in the calendar year itself, the limit referred to
in the caput of this article shall be proportional to the number of months in which the
microenterprise or small business has carried out activity, including
fractions of months.

§ 3º
The classification of the entrepreneur or of the simple or business company as a
microenterprise or small business, as well as its declassification, shall not
imply alteration, denunciation or any restriction with respect to contracts previously
entered into by them.

§
4º It
may not benefit from the differentiated legal treatment provided for in this
Complementary Law, including the regime referred to in
 art. 12 of this Complementary Law,
for any legal purpose, a legal entity:

I - whose capital
includes participation by another legal entity;

II - that is a branch,
subsidiary, agency or representation, in the country, of a legal entity headquartered
abroad;

III - whose capital
includes participation by an individual who is registered as an entrepreneur or is a partner in another
company that receives differentiated legal treatment under this Complementary
Law, provided that global gross revenue exceeds the limit referred to
in item II of the caput of this article;

IV - whose owner or partner
holds more than 10% (ten percent) of the capital of another company not
benefited by this Complementary Law, provided that global gross revenue
exceeds the limit referred to in item II of the caput of this article;

V - whose partner or owner
is an administrator or equivalent of another for-profit legal entity,
provided that global gross revenue exceeds the limit referred to in item II of the
caput of this article;

				V - whose partner or owner, in fact or
		by law, is an administrator or equivalent of another for-profit legal
		entity, provided that global gross revenue exceeds the limit
		referred to in item II of the caput;
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

VI - constituted in the
form of cooperatives, except consumer cooperatives;

VII - that holds a
participation in the capital of another legal entity;

VIII - that carries out the
activity of a commercial, investment or development bank, of a savings
bank, of a credit, financing and investment company, or of a real estate
credit company, of a securities and exchange broker or dealer, of a
leasing company, of private insurance and
capitalization, or of supplementary pension;

IX - resulting from or
remaining from the spin-off or any other form of dismemberment of a legal
entity that occurred in one of the 5 (five) preceding calendar years;

X - constituted in the
form of a joint-stock company.

XI - whose owners or partners maintain, cumulatively, with the
contracting party of the service, a relationship of personal involvement, subordination and habituality.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

				XII - that has a branch, subsidiary, agency
		or representation abroad.
				(Included by
Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

§ 5
The provisions of items IV and VII of § 4 of this article do not
apply to participation in the capital of credit cooperatives, as well as in
purchasing centers, subcontracting exchanges, in the consortium referred to in
art. 50
of this Complementary Law, and in the specific-purpose company provided for in art.
56 of this Complementary Law, and in similar associations, companies of
economic interest, mutual guarantee companies and other types of
company, whose corporate purpose is the exclusive defense of the economic
interests of microenterprises and small businesses.

§ 6º  In
the event that a microenterprise or small business incurs in any of the
situations provided for in the items of § 4,
it shall be excluded from the differentiated legal treatment provided for in this Complementary
Law, as well as from the regime referred to in art. 12, with effects from
the month following the month in which the impediment situation occurred.

§ 7
Observing the provisions of § 2 of this article, in the case of commencement
of activities, a microenterprise that, in the calendar year, exceeds the
annual gross revenue limit provided for in item I of the caput of this article shall pass, in the
following calendar year, to the status of small business.

§ 8
Observing the provisions of § 2 of this article, in the case of commencement
of activities, a small business that, in the calendar year, does not
exceed the annual gross revenue limit provided for in item I of the caput
of this article shall pass, in the following calendar year, to the status of microenterprise.

§ 9º  A
small business that, in the calendar year, exceeds the annual gross
revenue limit provided for in item II of the caput of this article shall be excluded, in the
month following the occurrence of the excess, from the differentiated legal treatment
provided for in this Complementary Law, including the regime referred to in

art. 12, for
all legal purposes, except as provided in §§ 9-A, 10
and 12.

§ 9-A.  The
effects of the exclusion provided for in § 9 shall occur in the
following calendar year if the excess found in relation to gross revenue
is not greater than 20% (twenty percent) of the limit referred to in item II of the
caput.

§ 10.  A small
business that, in the course of the calendar year of commencement of activity,
exceeds the proportional gross revenue limit referred to in § 2
shall be excluded from the differentiated legal treatment provided for in this
Complementary Law, as well as from the regime referred to in
 art. 12 of this Complementary Law,
with effects retroactive to the beginning of its activities.

§ 11.  In the event that the
Federal District, the States and the respective Municipalities adopt one of the limits
provided for in
 items I and II of the caput of art. 19 and in
art. 20, should the
gross revenue earned by the company during the calendar year of commencement of
activity exceed 1/12 (one twelfth) of the limit established multiplied
by the number of months of operation in that period, the company may not
pay ICMS and ISS under Simples Nacional, with respect to the
establishment located in the federative unit that has adopted them, with
effects retroactive to the beginning of its activities.

§ 12.  The exclusion referred to
in § 10 shall not be retroactive to the beginning of activities if the excess found in
relation to gross revenue is not greater than 20% (twenty percent) of the respective
limit referred to in that paragraph, in which case the effects of the exclusion
shall occur in the following calendar year.

§ 13.  The impediment referred to
in § 11 shall not be retroactive to the beginning of activities if the excess found
in relation to gross revenue is not greater than 20% (twenty percent) of the
respective limits referred to in that paragraph, in which case the effects of the
impediment shall occur in the following calendar year.

§ 14.  For purposes of
classification as a small business, revenues may be earned in the
domestic market up to the limit provided for in item II of the caput or in § 2,
as the case may be, and, additionally, revenues arising from the export of
goods, including when carried out through an export trading company or the
specific-purpose company provided for in
 art. 56 of this Complementary Law,
provided that export revenues also do not exceed the said limits of
annual gross revenue.

§ 14.  For purposes of classification as a microenterprise or
small business, revenues may be earned in the domestic market up to
the limit provided for in item II of the caput or in § 2,
as the case may be, and, additionally, revenues arising from the export of
goods or services, including when carried out through an export trading
company or the specific-purpose company provided for in art. 56 of this
Complementary Law, provided that export revenues also do not exceed the
said limits of annual gross revenue.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

§ 15.  In the case of §
14, for purposes of determining the rate referred to in
 § 1
of art. 18, the tax base provided for in its § 3, and the
rate increases provided for in its §§ 16, 16-A, 17 and 17-A, the
company's total gross revenue in the domestic and foreign markets shall be considered.

§ 15.  In the case of § 14, for purposes of determining the
rate referred to in § 1 of art. 18, the tax base
provided for in its § 3, and the rate increases provided for
in its §§ 16, 16-A, 17 and 17-A, the gross revenues earned in the domestic
market and those arising from exports shall be considered separately.   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

§ 16.  The provisions of this article shall be regulated by CGSN resolution.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		§
		17.  (VETOED).                   (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
		Pending effect

		§
		18.  (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
		Pending effect

				§ 19. For purposes of the provisions of this Complementary
		Law, all economic activities carried out, the gross revenues earned
		and the tax debts of the entities referred to in the caput and in art. 18-A must be
		considered, even if under separate
		registrations or as an individual taxpayer, in the same calendar year.
				(Included by
		Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

Art. 3-A.  The provisions of arts. 6
and 7, of Chapters V to X, of Section IV of Chapter XI, and of
Chapter XII of this Complementary Law apply to the individual rural producer and to the
family farmer as defined in
Law No.
11.326, of July 24, 2006, in good standing with Social Security and
with the Municipality, who have earned annual gross revenue up to the limit referred to in
item II of the caput of art. 3, except for the provisions of
Law No.
11.718, of June 20, 2008.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Sole paragraph.  The equivalence referred to in the caput does not apply to the
provisions of Chapter IV of this Complementary Law.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 3-B.  The provisions of this Complementary Law, with
the exception of those set forth in Chapter IV, apply to all microenterprises and
small businesses, as defined by items I and II of the caput
and § 4 of art. 3, even if not classified
under the tax regime of Simples Nacional, whether by prohibition or by choice.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

CHAPTER III

ON
REGISTRATION AND DEREGISTRATION

Art. 4
In drawing up rules within their competence, the bodies and entities involved in the
opening and closing of companies, at the 3 (three) levels of government, must
consider the unity of the process of registration and legalization of entrepreneurs and
legal entities, and for that purpose must coordinate their own competencies with
those of the other members, and seek, together, to make compatible and integrate
procedures, so as to avoid duplication of requirements and ensure the
linearity of the process, from the user's perspective.

§ 1  The
process of opening, registering, amending and deregistering the Individual
Microentrepreneur (MEI) referred to in art. 18-A of this Complementary Law, as well as
any requirement for the start of its operation, must have special and simplified
processing, preferably electronic, optional for the
entrepreneur, in the manner to be regulated by the CGSIM, observing the following:

§ 1  The process of opening, registering,
amending and deregistering the microenterprise and small business, as well as any
requirement for the start of its operation, must have special and
simplified processing, preferably electronic, optional for the entrepreneur,
observing the following:
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

I - the use of the business name, with the respective
handwritten signature, capital, requests, other signatures, information regarding marital status and
property regime, as well as the sending of documents, may be waived, in the
manner established by the CGSIM; and

II - the state or municipal
tax registry may be simplified or have its requirement postponed,
without prejudice to the possibility of issuing tax documents for purchase, sale
or provision of services, and the imposition of costs for authorization to issue such
documents, including on a case-by-case basis, is prohibited in any event.

II - (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

§
2º
(REPEALED)

§
3º
The amounts referring to fees, charges and other
costs relating to the opening, registration, filing, permit, license,
registry and other items relating to the provisions of §§ 1º
and 2º
of this article are reduced to 0 (zero).

§ 3  Except as otherwise provided in this Complementary Law, all costs,
including preliminary ones, relating to opening, registration, filing, operation, permit,
license, registry, amendments and deregistration and closure procedures, and
the other items relating to the Individual Microentrepreneur, including the amounts referring to fees,
charges and other contributions relating to registration,
licensing, trade union, regulatory, technical-responsibility-annotation, inspection
and supervision bodies for the exercise of regulated
professions, are reduced to 0 (zero).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 3-A.  Family farmers, as defined by
Law No. 11.326, of July 24
of 2006, and identified by the Declaration of Aptitude to Pronaf - DAP, whether individual or
corporate, as well as the MEI and the solidarity-economy entrepreneur, are exempt from
fees and other amounts relating to sanitary surveillance inspection.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4
 In the case of the MEI, referred to in art. 18-A of this Complementary Law, association
charges or the offer of private services relating to the acts referred to in § 3
of this article may only be made based on the MEI's own prior
demand, formalized by means of a contract with a handwritten signature, observing that:

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

I - for the issuance of collection slips, public and private banks
must require from trade-union and associative institutions prior specific
authorization to be issued by the CGSIM;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - failure to observe the provisions of this paragraph
shall constitute an unlawful advantage through inducement to error to the detriment of the MEI,
with the sanctions provided for by law applying.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 5
 (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 6  In the
event of
fraud
in the registration
of the Individual
Microentrepreneur - MEI
carried out
by third parties,
the request
for deregistration
must
be
made
exclusively
through electronic means, with
effects
retroactive
to the date
of registration, in the manner
to be regulated by the
CGSIM, the effects
of
§ 1
of art.
29 of this
Complementary
Law not being applicable.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Art. 5
The bodies and entities involved in the opening and closing of companies, at the 3
(three) levels of government, within the scope of their duties, must keep available to
users, both in person and via the worldwide web of
computers, information, guidance and instruments, in an integrated and
consolidated manner, allowing prior research before the steps of registration or filing,
amendment and deregistration of entrepreneurs and legal entities, so as to give the
user certainty as to the required documentation and as to the feasibility of the
registration or filing.

Sole paragraph.  Prior
research before the preparation of the constitutive instrument or its amendment must be
sufficient for the user to be informed by the competent bodies and entities of:

I - the official description
of the address of interest and the possibility of carrying out the
desired activity at the chosen location;

II - all the
requirements to be met to obtain operating authorization licenses,
according to the intended activity, the size, the degree of risk and the
location; and

III - the possibility of
using the business name of interest.

Art. 6
The requirements of sanitary safety, metrology, environmental control and fire prevention,
for purposes of registration and legalization of entrepreneurs and
legal entities, must be simplified, rationalized and standardized
by the bodies involved in the opening and closing of companies, within the scope of their
competencies.

§ 1  The
bodies and entities involved in the opening and closing of companies that are
responsible for the issuance of operating licenses and authorizations shall only
carry out inspections after the establishment begins operation, when the
activity, by its nature, entails a degree of risk compatible with that
procedure.

§ 2  The
competent bodies and entities shall define, within 6 (six) months of the
publication of this Complementary Law, the activities whose degree of risk is
considered high and which will require a prior inspection.

§ 3  In the absence of specific state, district or
municipal legislation on the definition of the degree of risk of the activity,
a CGSIM resolution shall apply.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4  The classification of a low degree of risk allows the
entrepreneur or legal entity to obtain activity licensing
by simply providing data and replacing prior proof
of compliance with requirements and restrictions with declarations by the owner or
person responsible.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 5  The provisions of this article do not prevent
tax registration.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 7
Except in cases where the degree of risk of the activity is considered high,
Municipalities shall issue a Provisional Operating Permit, which shall allow
the establishment to begin operating immediately after the act of registration.

Sole
paragraph.  In the cases referred to in the caput
of this article, the Municipality may grant a Provisional Operating Permit
to the individual microentrepreneur, to microenterprises and to small
businesses:

I - installed in areas
lacking legal land-use regulation or with precarious regulation; or

I - installed in an area or building lacking land-use and
real-estate regulation, including a certificate of occupancy; or

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - at the residence of the
individual microentrepreneur or of the owner or partner of the microenterprise or small
business, in the event that the activity does not generate a large flow of
people.

Art. 8
Entrepreneurs shall be guaranteed a single entry of registration data and
documents, safeguarding the independence of the databases and observing
the need for information by the bodies and entities that comprise them.

Art. 8  Entrepreneurs and
legal entities shall be guaranteed:

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

I - a single entry of data and documents;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - an integrated registration and legalization process among the bodies and entities
involved, by means of a computerized system that ensures:

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

a) the sequencing of the following stages: prior consultation of the business name
and of location feasibility, business registration, tax registrations and
activity licensing;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

b) the creation of the single national business registry database;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

III - single national registration identification corresponding to the number of
registration in the National Registry of Legal Entities - CNPJ.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 1  The system referred to in item II of the caput
must ensure to the integrated bodies and entities:

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

I - unrestricted sharing of data from the single national business
database;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - autonomy in defining the rules for proof
of compliance with requirements at the respective stages of the process.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 2  The single national registration identification shall replace,
for all purposes, the other registrations, whether federal, state or
municipal, after implementation of the system referred to in item II of the
caput, within the time and in the manner established by the CGSIM.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 3  It is prohibited for the bodies and entities integrated into the
computerized system referred to in item II of the caput to establish
requirements not provided for by law.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4  The coordination of the development and implementation of the
system referred to in item II of the caput shall be the responsibility of the CGSIM.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 9
The registration of constitutive acts, of their amendments and terminations (deregistrations),
regarding entrepreneurs and legal entities in any body involved in
business registration and in the opening of the company, at the 3 (three) levels of government,
shall occur regardless of the regularity of tax, social security or
labor obligations, whether principal or ancillary, of the entrepreneur, of the
company, of the partners, of the administrators or of companies in which they participate, without
prejudice to the liability of the entrepreneur, of the partners or of the administrators
for such obligations, assessed before or after the act of termination.

Art. 9  The registration of constitutive acts, of their
amendments and terminations (deregistrations), regarding entrepreneurs and legal entities in
any body at the 3 (three) levels of government shall occur regardless of the
regularity of tax, social security or labor obligations,
whether principal or ancillary, of the entrepreneur, of the company, of the partners, of the
administrators or of companies in which they participate, without prejudice to the
liability of the entrepreneur, of the owners, of the partners or of the
administrators for such obligations, assessed before or after the act of termination.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 1  The
filing, with the registration bodies, of the constitutive acts of entrepreneurs,
of business companies and other equivalent entities that qualify as
microenterprises or small businesses, as well as the filing of their
amendments, are exempt from the following requirements:

I - a certificate
of absence of criminal conviction, which shall be replaced by a declaration of the
owner or administrator, made under penalty of law, that he/she is not barred from
engaging in mercantile activity or the administration of a company, by virtue of
criminal conviction;

II - proof of clearance,
regularity or absence of debt referring to a tax or contribution of
any nature.

§ 2
The provisions of

§ 2 of art. 1 of Law No. 8.906, of July 4
1994, do not apply to microenterprises and small businesses.

§ 3º  In
the case of the existence of tax, social security or labor obligations
referred to in the caput,
the owner, partner or administrator of the microenterprise and small
business that has been inactive for more than 12 (twelve) months may request
deregistration in the records of federal, state and municipal public bodies
regardless of the payment of tax debts, fees or fines owed
for late delivery of the respective returns in those periods, observing the
provisions of §§ 4º and 5º.

§ 3  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4º  The
deregistration referred to in § 3º does not prevent, subsequently, the
assessment or collection of taxes, contributions and respective penalties, arising from
mere failure to pay or from a proven practice, established in an
administrative or judicial proceeding, of other irregularities committed by the
entrepreneurs, by the microenterprises, by the small businesses or by their
owners, partners or administrators.

§ 4  Deregistration of the entrepreneur or of the legal entity does not
prevent, subsequently, the assessment or collection of taxes, contributions and
respective penalties, arising from failure to comply with obligations or from a
proven practice, established in an administrative or judicial proceeding, of other
irregularities committed by entrepreneurs, by legal entities or by
their owners, partners or administrators.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

 §
5º The
request for deregistration in the case provided for in § 3º
of this article entails the joint liability of the owners, partners and
administrators for the period in which the respective taxable events occurred.

§ 5  The request for deregistration of the entrepreneur or of the legal
entity entails the joint liability of the entrepreneurs, of the owners, of the
partners and of the administrators for the period in which the respective taxable
events occurred.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 6º
The bodies referred to in the
caput of this
article shall have a period of 60 (sixty) days to carry out the deregistration in the respective
registries.

§ 7º
Once the period provided for in § 6º
of this article has elapsed without a response from the competent body, the deregistration of the
registrations of microenterprises and of small businesses shall be presumed.

§ 8º
Except as provided in §§ 3º
to 5º
of this article, the liability rules provided for the other legal
entities shall apply to the deregistration of a microenterprise or small business.

§ 8  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 9º
For the purposes of § 3º
of this article, a microenterprise or small business that does not present any
change in equity and operating activity during the whole
calendar year is considered inactive.

§ 9  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 10.  In the case of
the existence of tax, social security or labor obligations,
whether principal or
ancillary, the MEI may, at any time, request deregistration in the records
regardless of the payment of tax debts, fees or fines owed
for late delivery of the respective returns in those periods, observing the
provisions of §§ 1º
and 2º.

§ 10.  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 11.  The
deregistration referred to in § 10 does not prevent, subsequently, the
assessment or collection from the owner of taxes, contributions and respective
penalties, arising from mere failure to pay or from a proven practice, established
in an administrative or judicial proceeding, of other irregularities committed by the
company or by its owner.

§ 11.  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 12.  The
request for deregistration in the case provided for in § 10 entails assumption by the owner
of the obligations described therein.

§ 12.  (Repealed).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 10.  The bodies and entities involved in the opening and closing of
companies, at the 3 (three) levels of government, may not require:

I - except in cases of
prior authorization, any documents additional to those required by the
executing bodies of the Public Registry of Commercial Companies and Related Activities and of the
Civil Registry of Legal Entities;

II - a document of
ownership or lease agreement for the property where the head office, branch
or other establishment will be installed, except to prove the address indicated;

III - proof of
good standing of representatives of entrepreneurs or legal entities with their
professional class bodies, in any form, as a requirement for the approval of an act of
registration, amendment or deregistration of a company, as well as for authentication of
bookkeeping instruments.

Art. 11.  It is prohibited to
establish any type of documentary or formal requirement, restrictive or
conditioning, by the bodies involved in the opening and closing of companies, at the
3 (three) levels of government, that exceeds the strict limit of the requirements
pertinent to the essence of the act of registration, amendment or deregistration of the
company.

CHAPTER IV

ON
TAXES AND CONTRIBUTIONS

Section I

On the Institution and
Scope

Art. 12.  The Special Unified Regime for the Collection of Taxes and
Contributions owed by Microenterprises and Small Businesses - Simples Nacional
is hereby instituted.

Sole paragraph.  (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

				§ 1º (Vetoed).
				 (Included
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effects

				§ 2º Simples Nacional must observe the
		principles of simplicity, transparency, tax justice, the
		cooperation and integration of the tax administrations of the Union, the
		States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, and the defense of the
		environment.
				 (Included
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effects

				§ 3º The Union, the States, the Federal
		District and the Municipalities shall exercise tax administration of Simples
		Nacional in an integrated manner, under the terms and limits established by the
		Federal Constitution and by this Complementary Law.
				 (Included
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effects

Art. 13.  Simples
Nacional entails the monthly collection, by means of a single collection document,
of the following taxes and contributions:

I - Corporate Income
Tax - IRPJ;

II - Tax on
Industrialized Products - IPI, observing the provisions of item XII of § 1
of this article;

III - Social Contribution
on Net Income - CSLL;

IV - Contribution to the
Financing of Social Security - COFINS, observing the provisions of item XII
of § 1 of this article;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

V - Contribution to
PIS/Pasep, observing the provisions of item XII of § 1 of this
article;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

VI
- Employer Social Security Contribution - CPP for Social Security, owed by
the legal entity, referred to in

art. 22 of Law No. 8.212, of July 24, 1991, except in the case of a microenterprise and small
business dedicated to the service-provision activities referred to in
§ 5º-C
of art. 18 of this Complementary Law;

VII - Tax on
Operations Relating to the Circulation of Goods and on the Provision of Interstate
and Intermunicipal Transportation and Communication Services - ICMS;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

VIII - Tax on
Services of Any Nature - ISS.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 1  The
collection under this article does not exclude the levy of the following
taxes or contributions, owed as a taxpayer or a person otherwise responsible,
with respect to which the legislation applicable to other legal
entities shall be observed:

I - Tax on
Credit, Foreign Exchange and Insurance Operations, or Relating to Securities -
IOF;

II - Tax on the
Importation of Foreign Products - II;

III - Tax on the
Exportation, Abroad, of National or Nationalized Products - IE;

IV
- Rural Land Property Tax - ITR;

V - Income Tax,
relating to income or net gains earned on fixed
or variable income investments;

VI - Income Tax
relating to capital gains earned on the disposal of permanent assets;

VII - Provisional
Contribution on Financial Movement or Transmission of Amounts and of Credits and Rights
of a Financial Nature - CPMF;
				 (Repealed
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

VIII - Contribution to the
Severance Pay Fund - FGTS;

IX - Contribution to
the maintenance of Social Security, relating to the worker;

X - Contribution to
Social Security, relating to the person of the entrepreneur, as an individual
taxpayer;

XI - Income Tax
relating to payments or credits made by the legal entity to
individuals;

XII - Contribution to
PIS/Pasep, Cofins and IPI levied on the importation of goods and services;

XIII - ICMS owed:

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

a) on operations or
services subject to the tax substitution regime;

a) on
		operations subject to the tax substitution regime, single-stage
		concentrated taxation (monophasic), and subject to the
		regime of advance tax collection with closure of taxation,
		involving fuels and lubricants; electric energy; cigarettes and
		other tobacco derivative products; beverages; edible vegetable oils
		and olive oils; wheat flour and wheat flour
		mixtures; pasta; sugars; dairy
		products; meats and their preparations;
		cereal-based preparations; chocolates; bakery products and
		the cookie and cracker industry; ice cream and preparations for the manufacture
		of ice cream by machine; coffees and mate, their extracts, essences and
		concentrates; sauce preparations and prepared sauces; preparations
		of vegetable products; pet food; motor
		vehicles and automobiles, their parts, components and accessories;
		tires; inner tubes and rubber protectors; medicines and
		other pharmaceutical products for human or veterinary use;
		cosmetics; perfumery and personal hygiene products; paper;
		plastics; pens and suitcases; cement; lime and mortars; ceramic
		products; glass; metal and plastic works for construction; roof tiles and
		water tanks; paints and varnishes; electronic,
		electro-electronic and household appliance products; wires; cables and other
		conductors; electrical transformers and reactors; circuit breakers;
		switches and outlets; insulators; lightning rods and lamps; air-conditioning
		machines and equipment; household centrifuges; weighing
		devices and instruments for household use; fire extinguishers; shaving
		devices or machines; hair-cutting or clipping
		machines; hair-removal devices with a built-in electric motor;
		electric water heaters for household use and thermometers; tools; ethyl
		alcohol; powder and liquid laundry soaps; detergents; bleaches;
		sponges; steel wool and fabric softeners; sale of goods
		through the door-to-door system; on operations subject to the
		tax substitution regime for prior operations; and on the provision of
		services subject to the regimes of tax substitution and
		advance collection of tax with closure of taxation;   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

b) by a third party
that the taxpayer is obligated to, by force of applicable state or
district legislation;

c) on entry, into
the territory of the State or of the Federal District, of petroleum, including
lubricants and liquid and gaseous fuels derived from it, as well as electric
energy, when not intended for commercialization or industrialization;

d) at the time of
customs clearance;

e) on the acquisition or
maintenance in stock of goods not covered by a tax document;

f) on an operation or
service not covered by a tax document;

g)
on operations with goods or merchandise subject to the advance tax-collection
regime, on acquisitions in other States and the Federal District:

1. with closure of
taxation, observing the provisions of
 item IV of § 4º of
art. 18 of this Complementary Law;

2. without closure of
taxation, in which case the difference between the internal rate and
the interstate rate shall be charged, and the addition of any amount is
prohibited;

h) on acquisitions in
other States and in the Federal District of goods or merchandise not
subject to the advance tax-collection regime, relating to the difference between the
internal rate and the interstate rate;

XIV - ISS owed:

a) with respect to services
subject to tax substitution or withholding at source;

b) on the importation of
services;

XV - other taxes within the
competence of the Union, the States, the Federal District or the
Municipalities, not listed in the preceding items.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 1-A. The amounts passed on to the professionals referred to in
Law No.
12.592, of January 18, 2012, hired by means of a partnership, under the
terms of civil legislation, shall not be included in the gross revenue of the contracting
company for taxation purposes, it being incumbent on the contracting party to withhold and
pay the taxes owed by the contracted party.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 2
Observing applicable legislation, the levy of withholding income tax, in the
case of item V of § 1 of this article, shall be definitive.

§ 3  Microenterprises
and small businesses opting for Simples Nacional are
exempt from payment of the other contributions instituted by the Union,
including contributions to private social-service and vocational-training
entities linked to the trade-union system, referred to in

art. 240 of the Federal Constitution, and other autonomous social-service entities.

§ 4
(VETOED).

§
5º  The
difference between the internal and interstate rates referred to in items g
and h of item XIII of § 1º
of this article shall be calculated based on the rates applicable to
legal entities not opting for Simples Nacional.

§ 6º
The Management Committee of Simples Nacional shall:

I - regulate the form and
conditions under which the microenterprise or small business
opting for Simples Nacional shall be assigned the status of tax
substitute; and

II - may regulate the
form and conditions under which the ICMS advance-collection regime
provided for in item g of item XIII of § 1º
of this article shall be established.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

		§ 7
		 The provisions of item a of item XIII of § 1
		shall be regulated by an agreement entered into by the States and the
		Federal District, after consulting the CGSN and representatives of the economic
		segments involved.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)     (Pending effect)

		§ 8
		 With respect to non-alcoholic beverages, pasta,
		dairy products, meats and their preparations, cereal-based
		preparations, chocolates, bakery products and the cookie and cracker
		industry, sauce preparations and prepared sauces, preparations of
		vegetable products, roof tiles and other ceramic products for construction, and
		detergents, the provisions of item a of item XIII of §
		1 apply to those manufactured on a relevant industrial scale in
		each segment, observing the provisions of § 7.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)     (Pending effect)

Art. 13-A.  For
purposes of the collection of ICMS and ISS under Simples Nacional, the maximum limit
referred to in item II of the caput of art. 3 shall be R$
3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais), observing the provisions of §§
11, 13, 14 and 15 of the same article, of §§ 17 and 17-A of art. 18, and of § 4
of art. 19.  (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Art. 14.  The amounts effectively paid or distributed to the owner or
partner of the microenterprise or small business opting for Simples
Nacional shall be considered exempt from income tax, both at source and in the
beneficiary's annual return, except for those corresponding to pro-labore, rent, or
services rendered.

§ 1  The
exemption referred to in the caput of this article is limited to the amount
resulting from the application of the percentages referred to in

art. 15 of Law No. 9.249, of December 26, 1995, to monthly gross revenue, in the case of
advance withholding, or to total annual gross revenue, in the case of an
annual return, subtracted from the amount owed under Simples Nacional for the period.

§ 2  The
provisions of § 1 of this article do not apply in the event that the
legal entity maintains formal accounting records and shows a profit exceeding that
limit.

Art. 15.  (VETOED).

Art. 16.
The election of Simples Nacional by the legal
entity classified as a microenterprise or small business shall be made
in the manner to be established by an act of the Management Committee, being irrevocable
for the whole calendar year.

§ 1
For purposes of classification under Simples Nacional, a microenterprise
or small business shall be considered to be one whose gross revenue in the calendar year prior
to that of the election falls within the limits provided for in art. 3
of this Complementary Law.

§ 1-A.  The election
of Simples Nacional entails acceptance of an electronic communication
system, intended, among other purposes, to:

I - notify the taxpayer
of any type of administrative act, including those relating to the
denial of the election, the exclusion from the regime, and tax enforcement actions;

II - send
notifications and summonses; and

III - issue notices in
general.

§ 1º-B.  The
electronic communication system referred to in § 1-A shall be
regulated by the CGSN, observing the following:

I - communications shall
be made, by electronic means, on a dedicated portal, dispensing with their publication
in the Official Gazette and mailing by post;

II - communication made
in the manner provided for in the caput shall be considered personal for all
legal purposes;

III - notice given by
means of the system referred to in § 1-A using
digital certification or an access code shall satisfy validity requirements;

IV - communication shall be
considered to have been made on the day the taxpayer actually consults
the content of the communication electronically; and

V - in the case of item
IV, in cases where the consultation takes place on a non-business day, the communication
shall be considered to have been made on the first following business day.

§ 1º-C.  The consultation
referred to in items IV and V of § 1º-B must be made within 45
(forty-five) days counted from the date the communication is made available on the
portal referred to in item I of § 1º-B, or within a longer period
set by the CGSN, under penalty of being automatically considered
made on the date that period ends.

§ 1º-D.  While
the regulation referred to in § 1-B has not been issued, the
federative entities may use electronic communication systems, with
their own rules, for the purposes provided for in § 1-A, and the
said regulation may provide for the adoption of such systems as
complementary means of communication.

§ 2  The
election referred to in the caput of this article must be made in the month of
January, up to its last business day, producing effects as of the first day
of the calendar year of the election, except as provided in § 3
of this article.

§ 3  The
election shall produce effects as of the date of commencement of activity, provided that
it is made under the terms, period and conditions to be established in the act of the Management
Committee referred to in the caput of this article.

§
4
Microenterprises and small businesses regularly opting for the
tax regime referred to in Law No.
9.317, of December 5, 1996, shall be considered enrolled in Simples Nacional as of July 1,
2007, except those that are barred from electing due to some
prohibition imposed by this Complementary Law.

§ 5  The
Management Committee shall regulate the automatic election provided for in § 4
of this article.

§ 6  The
denial of the election for Simples Nacional shall be formalized by an act of the
Tax Administration under regulations of the Management Committee.

Section II

On the Prohibitions on
Entry into Simples Nacional

Art. 17.  Microenterprises
or small businesses may not pay taxes and contributions under Simples
Nacional if they:

Art. 17. Microenterprises or small businesses may not pay taxes and contributions
	under Simples Nacional if they:     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

I - engage in the
cumulative and continuous provision of credit advisory services, credit
management, selection and risk assessment, management of accounts payable and receivable,
asset management, purchase of receivables
resulting from term mercantile sales or from the provision of services
(factoring);

I - engage in the cumulative and continuous provision of services of
	credit advisory, credit management, selection and risk assessment, management of
	accounts payable and receivable, asset management,
	or purchase of receivables resulting from term mercantile sales or
	from the provision of services (factoring), or carry out operations of
	loan, financing and discounting of credit instruments,
	exclusively with their own resources, having as counterparties
	individual microentrepreneurs, microenterprises and small businesses,
	including in the form of a simple credit company;   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

II - have a partner
domiciled abroad;

				II - whose owner or partner is
		domiciled abroad;
				 (Wording
given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

III - whose capital
includes participation by a public administration entity, direct or indirect, federal,
state or municipal;

IV
- (REPEALED)

V - have a debt
with the National Social Security Institute - INSS, or with the Federal, State
or Municipal Public Treasuries, whose enforceability is not suspended;

VI - provide intermunicipal
and interstate passenger transport services;

VI - provide intermunicipal and
interstate passenger transport services, except when carried out by river
or when having characteristics of urban or metropolitan transport, or when carried out under
continuous chartering in a metropolitan area for the transport of students or
workers;

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

VII - generate,
transmit, distribute or trade in electric energy;

VIII - engage in
the import or manufacture of automobiles and motorcycles;

IX - engage in the
import of fuels;

X
- engage in the production or wholesale of:

a) cigarettes, cigarillos,
cigars, cigarette filters, firearms, ammunition and gunpowder, explosives
and detonators;

b) beverages
described below:

b) non-alcoholic
beverages
described
below:    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

1 - alcoholic beverages;      (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(Effective date)

2 - soft drinks,
including carbonated flavored waters;

2. (Repealed);

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

3 - compound preparations,
non-alcoholic (concentrated extracts or concentrated flavors), for making
soft drinks, with a dilution capacity of up to 10 (ten) parts of the
drink to each part of the concentrate;

3. (Repealed);

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

4 - non-alcoholic beers;

c) alcoholic
beverages,
except those
produced
or sold
at wholesale
by:  (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

1.
micro
and
small
breweries;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

2.
micro
and
small
wineries;

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

3.
liqueur
producers;  (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

4.
micro
and
small
distilleries;   (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

XI - are intended for
the provision of services arising from the exercise of intellectual activity, of a
technical, scientific, sporting, artistic or cultural nature, whether constituting a regulated
profession or not, as well as those providing services as an
instructor, broker, customs agent, or any type of business
intermediation;

XI - (Repealed);

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

XII - carry out the
assignment or leasing of labor;

XIII - engage in
consulting activity;

XIII - (Repealed);

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

XIV - engage in
subdivision and real-estate development.

XV
- engage in the leasing of properties they own, except when this
refers to the provision of services taxed by ISS.

				XV - engage in the activity of leasing
		properties they own;
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

XVI - have
no registration or have an irregularity in a federal, municipal or
state tax registry, when required.

§
1º  The
prohibitions relating to the exercise of activities provided for in the
caput of this
article do not apply to legal entities engaged exclusively in the
activities referred to in
 §§ 5º-B to 5º-E of
art. 18 of this Complementary Law, or that carry them out together with other
activities that have not been the subject of a prohibition in the
caput of this
article.

I - (REPEALED)

II - (REPEALED)

III - (REPEALED)

IV - (REPEALED)

V - (REPEALED)

VI - (REPEALED)

VII - (REPEALED)

VIII - (REPEALED)

IX - (REPEALED)

X - (REPEALED)

XI - (REPEALED)

XII - (REPEALED)

XIII - (REPEALED)

XIV - (REPEALED)

XV - (REPEALED)

XVI - (REPEALED)

XVII - (REPEALED)

XVIII - (REPEALED)

XIX - (REPEALED)

XX - (REPEALED)

XXI - (REPEALED)

XXII
- (VETOED);

XXIII - (REPEALED)

XXIV - (REPEALED)

XXV - (REPEALED)

XXVI - (REPEALED)

XXVII - (REPEALED)

XXVIII
- (VETOED).

§
2
A microenterprise or small business may also opt for Simples Nacional if it is
engaged in the provision of other services that have not been expressly
prohibited in this article, provided that it does not fall under any of the
prohibition scenarios provided for in this Complementary Law.

§ 3
(VETOED).

§ 4º  In the case
of item XVI of the caput, the provisions of art. 4 of this Complementary
Law must be observed for the MEI.

§ 5  Companies
that carry out the activities provided for in the items of item
c of item X of the
caput of this article must
mandatorily be registered with the Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and Supply,
and shall also be subject to
the regulations of the National
Health Surveillance Agency and of the Secretariat
of the Federal
Revenue
of Brazil
regarding
the production
and
marketing
of alcoholic beverages.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Section III

On Rates and Tax
Base

Art.
18.  The amount owed monthly by a commercial microenterprise and small
business, opting for Simples Nacional, shall be determined by application of the
table in
Annex I of this Complementary Law.

Art. 18.  The amount owed monthly by a microenterprise or small
		business, opting for Simples Nacional, shall be determined by
		application of the rates set forth in the tables of Annexes I to VI of this
		Complementary Law to the tax base referred to in § 3
		of this article, observing the provisions of § 15 of art. 3.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

§ 1
For purposes of determining the rate, the taxpayer shall use the gross
revenue accumulated over the 12 (twelve) months prior to the assessment period.
</content>
Art. 18.  The amount due
monthly
by the microenterprise 
or small business
opting
for Simples
Nacional
shall be determined
through
application of the
effective rates,
calculated
from the
nominal 
rates
set forth in the
tables
of 
Annexes
I to
V of this Complementary Law, 
on the
tax 
base
referred to
in 
§ 3 of this
article, observing
the 
provisions
of §
15
of art.
3.                  

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155 of 2016)      Effective upon production of effects

§
1  For
the purpose
of determining
the
nominal
rate,
the taxpayer
shall use the
gross
revenue
accrued over the
preceding twelve 
months prior to the assessment
period.              

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155 of 2016)      Effective upon production of effects

		§
		1 A.  The
		effective
		rate
		is the
		result
		of:

		RBT12xAliq-PD, 
		where:

		RBT12

		(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 
		2016)      Effective upon production of effects

I
- RBT12:
gross revenue
accrued over the
preceding 
twelve months
prior to the period
of assessment;                   

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

II
- Aliq:
nominal
rate
set forth
in 
Annexes
I to
V of this
Complementary Law;                      

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

III
- PD:
portion to
be deducted
set forth in the
Annexes
I to
V of this
Complementary Law.                  

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§
1-B.  The effective percentages
of each
tax
shall be calculated from the
effective rate,
multiplied 
by the allocation percentage 
set forth
in the Annexes
I to
V of this
Complementary 
Law, 
observing 
that:                

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

I
- the
maximum effective
percentage
allocated
to ISS
shall be
5% (five percent), 
with any difference transferred,
in a
proportional manner, 
to the taxes
federal
of the same
bracket
of gross
annual revenue;                       

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

II
- any
hundredth
decimal difference
between
the total
of the percentages 
and the effective rate
shall be transferred
to the
tax
with
the highest
allocation percentage 
in the respective
bracket
of gross
revenue.                 (Included by Complementary 
Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects 

§
1-C.  In the event of
transformation, 
extinction, merger
or succession of the
taxes referred to
in
items IV
and V
of art.
13, the
nominal and
effective rates
provided for
in this 
article
and in Annexes I to
V of this Complementary
Law,
shall be maintained, and
ordinary
law
shall provide
on the
allocation
of the amounts
collected
for
the 
federal
taxes,
without
change
in the total 
of the allocation
percentages
owed to
them, and
maintained
the allocation 
percentages
allocated
to ICMS
and to
ISS.              
(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 
2016)      Effective upon 
production of effects

§ 2  In 
the case of a business start-up, the accrued gross revenue amounts set forth 
in the tables of the 
 Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law shall be proportionalized 
to the number of months of activity in the period.

§ 2  In 
		the case of a business start-up, the accrued gross revenue amounts 
		set forth in the tables of Annexes I to VI of this Complementary Law shall 
		be proportionalized to the number of months of activity in the period.               
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)     
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 2  In
the case
of a business
start-up, 
the values 
of accrued
gross
revenue
set forth
in the Annexes
I to V of this 
Complementary Law 
shall
be proportionalized
to the
number
of
months
of 
activity
in the period.                  

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 3  
The rate determined pursuant to 
the caput and §§ 1 and 2 of this 
article shall apply to the gross revenue earned in the month, and such incidence may, at the taxpayer's option, occur in the manner 
regulated by the Management Committee, on the revenue received in the month, such 
option being irrevocable for the entire calendar year.

§
3  On
the gross
revenue
earned
in the 
month, the effective rate
determined
in the 
manner
of the caput
and of
§§ 1, 1-A and 2
of this article, 
and such incidence 
may occur, at the option
of the taxpayer, in the
manner 
regulated
by the
Management
Committee,
on the revenue received in the month, such option being irrevocable for the entire 
calendar year.                        

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 4  The 
taxpayer shall separately consider, for purposes of payment:

I - revenue 
arising from the resale of goods;

II - revenue 
arising from the sale of goods manufactured by the taxpayer;

III - revenue 
arising from the provision of services, as well as from the leasing of movable property;

IV 
- revenue arising from the sale of goods subject to tax substitution 
and single-stage concentrated taxation (monophasic), as well as, 
with respect to ICMS, tax anticipation with closure of taxation; 

V 
- revenue arising from the export of goods abroad, 
including sales made through an export trading company 
or 
the specific-purpose company provided for in art. 56 of this Complementary Law.

		§ 4  The 
		taxpayer shall separately consider, for purposes of payment, 
		revenue arising from:                   
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		I - resale of goods, which shall be taxed pursuant to Annex I 
		of this Complementary Law;                 
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		II - sale 
		of goods manufactured by the taxpayer, which shall be taxed 
		pursuant to Annex II of this Complementary Law;                   
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		III - provision of services referred to in § 5-B 
		of this article and services related to the leasing of real property and 
		real estate brokerage, provided the provisions of item XV of 
		art. 17 are observed, which shall be taxed pursuant to Annex III of this 
		Complementary Law;                 
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		IV - provision of services referred to in §§ 5-C to 
		5-F and 5-I of this article, which shall 
		be taxed in the manner provided for in those paragraphs;                   
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		V - leasing of movable property, which shall be taxed pursuant to Annex III 
		of this Complementary Law, less the portion corresponding to ISS;                 
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		VI - activity with simultaneous levy of IPI and ISS, which shall 
		be taxed pursuant to Annex II of this Complementary Law, less the 
		portion corresponding to ICMS and plus the portion corresponding to 
		ISS provided for in Annex III of this Complementary Law;              
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      
(See Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

		VII - marketing of medicines and compounded pharmaceutical products produced 
		by compounding of formulas:                          
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		a) 
		custom order for subsequent delivery to the acquirer, on a personal basis, 
		pursuant to prescriptions from qualified professionals or referral by the 
		pharmacist, produced at the establishment itself after the initial 
		consultation, which shall be taxed pursuant to Annex III of this 
		Complementary Law;                        
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		b) in 
		other cases, when they shall be taxed pursuant to Annex I of this 
		Complementary Law.                  
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		§ 4-A.  The 
		taxpayer shall also segregate revenue:                 
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		I - arising from transactions or provisions subject to taxation 
		concentrated in a single stage (monophasic), as well as, with respect to 
		ICMS, where the tax has already been collected by a tax substitute or 
		by tax anticipation with closure of taxation;                 
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		II - on 
		which there was withholding of ISS pursuant to § 6 of this 
		article and § 4 of art. 21 of this Complementary Law, or, 
		in the case of § 22-A of this article, is due in a fixed amount to the 
		respective municipality;                   
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		III - subject to taxation in a fixed amount or that have been subject to 
		exemption or reduction of ISS or ICMS pursuant to this Complementary 
		Law;                 
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		IV - arising from export abroad, including sales 
		made through an export trading company or the 
		specific-purpose company provided for in art. 56 of this Complementary Law;                   
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		V - on 
		which ISS is owed to a Municipality other than that of the establishment 
		of the provider, when it shall be collected under Simples Nacional.                 
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

§ 5  
Industrial activities shall be taxed pursuant to 
 Annex II of this 
Complementary Law..

I - (REPEALED)

II - (REPEALED)

III - (REPEALED)

IV 
- (REPEALED)

V - (REPEALED)

VI - (REPEALED)

VII - (REPEALED).

§ 
5-A
 Leasing activities involving 
movable property shall be taxed pursuant to 

Annex III of this Complementary Law, 
deducting from the rate the percentage corresponding to the ISS provided for in that 
Annex.

		§ 5-A. 
		 (Repealed).                
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)     
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 
5-B  
Without prejudice to the provisions of 

 § 1 of art. 17 
of this Complementary Law, the following service-provision activities shall be taxed pursuant to 

Annex III of this Complementary Law 
as follows: 

I 
- daycare, preschool and elementary education establishments, technical schools, 
vocational and secondary schools, foreign language schools, art schools, 
flight training courses, exam-preparation courses, management courses and 
free courses, except those provided for in items II and III of § 5-D 
of this article;

II 
- outsourced postal agency;

III - travel and tourism agency;

IV - training center for 
drivers of motor vehicles for land transport of passengers and 
cargo;

V - lottery agency;

VI - (REPEALED)

VII - (REPEALED)

VIII - (REPEALED)

IX - installation services, 
repairs and general maintenance, as well as machining, welding, treatment and 
coating of metals;

X - (REPEALED)

XI - (REPEALED)

XII - (REPEALED)

XIII - municipal transport of 
passengers;  

XIV - accounting service 
offices, observing the provisions of §§ 22-B and 22-C of this article.

XV - film, 
audiovisual, artistic and cultural productions, their exhibition or 
presentation, including in the case of music, literature, performing arts, 
visual arts, film and audiovisual arts.

		XVI - 
		physiotherapy;                  
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

		XVII - 
		insurance brokerage.                  
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)

XVIII -
architecture
and 
urban planning;                

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

XIX
- 
medicine,
including
laboratory medicine,
and nursing;                 

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

XX
- dentistry
and dental
prosthetics;                 

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      Effective upon production of effects

XXI
- psychology,
psychoanalysis,
occupational therapy, acupuncture, 
podiatry, speech therapy, 
nutrition clinics and
vaccination clinics and milk banks.                  

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 5-C  Without prejudice to 
the provisions of 

 § 1 of art. 17 
of this Complementary Law, the 
following service-provision activities shall be taxed pursuant to Annex IV of this 
Complementary Law, in which case the 
contribution provided for in 

 item VI of the

caput 
of art. 13 of this Complementary Law shall not be included in Simples Nacional, and shall be collected pursuant to the 
legislation applicable to other taxpayers or persons responsible:

I - construction of real property and 
engineering works in general, including in the form of subcontracting, execution of 
projects and landscaping services, as well as interior decoration;

II - 
(REPEALED)

III - 
(REPEALED)

IV - 
(REPEALED)

V - 
(REPEALED)

VI - surveillance, cleaning 
or maintenance services.

VII - 
		legal services.                  
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 5-D  Without prejudice to 
the provisions of 
 § 1 of art. 17 of this Complementary Law, the 
following service-provision activities shall be taxed pursuant to 

Annex 
V of this Complementary Law:

§ 5-D.  Without prejudice
to the provisions 
of §
1 of
art. 17
of this Complementary Law, 
the following
activities
of the provision
of services
shall be taxed pursuant
to
Annex
III 
of this Complementary Law:                 

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

I - concurrently, administration and 
leasing of third-party real property;

		I - administration and leasing of third-party real property;                 
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

II - dance, 
capoeira, yoga and martial arts academies;

III - academies for physical 
and sports activities, swimming, and sports schools;

IV - development of computer 
programs, including electronic games, provided they are developed at the 
establishment of the electing taxpayer;

V - licensing or assignment of 
the right to use computer programs;

VI - planning, creation, 
maintenance and updating of web pages, provided they are carried out at the 
establishment of the electing taxpayer;

VII - 
(REPEALED)

VIII - 
(REPEALED)

IX - companies that assemble 
trade fair booths;

X - (REPEALED)

XI - (REPEALED)

XII - clinical analysis 
or clinical pathology laboratories;

XIII - tomography services, 
medical imaging diagnostics, graphic records and optical methods, as well as 
magnetic resonance imaging;

XIV - prosthesis services in general.

§ 5-E  Without prejudice to the provisions of § 1 of art. 17 
of this Complementary Law, communication service-provision activities and 
interstate and intermunicipal cargo transport activities shall be taxed 
pursuant to Annex III, less the portion corresponding to ISS and plus the 
portion corresponding to ICMS provided for in Annex I.

		§ 5-E.  
		Without prejudice to the provisions of § 1 of art. 17 of this 
		Complementary Law, communication service-provision activities and 
		interstate and intermunicipal cargo transport activities, and transport 
		activities authorized under item VI of the caput of art. 17, including in the 
		river-transport mode, shall be taxed pursuant to Annex III, less the 
		portion corresponding to ISS and plus the portion corresponding to 
		ICMS provided for in Annex I.     
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)      

		(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

§ 5-F The service-provision activities referred to in 

§ 2 of art. 17 of this Complementary Law shall be taxed pursuant to
Annex III of this Complementary Law, unless, for any of these activities, 
there is express provision for taxation pursuant to Annexes IV or V of this 
Complementary Law.

§ 5-F.  
		The service-provision activities referred to in § 2 
		of art. 17 of this Complementary Law shall be taxed pursuant to Annex III 
		of this Complementary Law, unless, for any of these activities, there is 
		express provision for taxation pursuant to Annexes IV, V or VI of this 
		Complementary Law.                       
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 5-F.  The activities
of
provision of
services
referred to in
§ 2
of art. 17
of this
Complementary Law
shall be taxed
pursuant 
to
Annex 
III of this
Complementary Law,
unless,
for any
of these activities, 
there is express
provision
for taxation
pursuant 
to
the
Annexes
IV or
V of this Complementary
Law.                       

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 5-G. 
Activities with simultaneous levy of IPI and ISS shall be taxed pursuant 
to Annex II of this Complementary Law, less the portion corresponding to 
ICMS and plus the portion corresponding to ISS provided for in Annex III of this 
Complementary Law.

		§ 5-G.  
		(Repealed).                   
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 5-H.  
The prohibition referred to in item XII of the caput of art. 17 of this 
Complementary Law does not apply to the activities referred to in § 5-C 
of this article.

§ 5-I.  
		Without prejudice to the provisions of § 1 of art. 17 of this 
		Complementary Law, the following service-provision activities shall be 
		taxed pursuant to Annex VI of this Complementary Law:                 
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 5-I. 
 Without
prejudice
to the provisions
of
§ 1 of art.
17
of this
Complementary Law, 
the following
activities
of the provision
of services
shall be taxed pursuant
to
Annex
V 
of this Complementary Law:              

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

		I - medicine, including laboratory medicine and nursing;              (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)                   (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
		(In force)

		II - veterinary medicine;                 
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		III - dentistry;                     (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)                     (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016) 

		(In force)

		IV - psychology, psychoanalysis, occupational therapy, acupuncture, podiatry, 
		speech therapy, nutrition clinics, vaccination clinics and milk banks;                   (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)        (Effective upon production of effects)                 

		(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016) 

		(In force)

		V - commissary services, customs broker, translation and 
		interpretation;                  
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		VI - architecture, engineering, measurement, cartography, topography, 
		geology, geodesy, testing, support and technical and technological analysis, 
		research, design, drafting and agronomy;                     
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

VI - engineering, 
measurement, cartography, topography, geology, 
geodesy, testing,
support
and technical
and technological
analysis,
research,
design, drafting
and agronomy;                       

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

		VII - commercial representation and other business and third-party service 
		intermediation activities;           
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		VIII - expert appraisal, auctioning and valuation;           
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		IX - auditing, economics, consulting, management, organization, control and 
		administration;           
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		X - journalism and advertising;           
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		XI - agency services, except for labor recruitment;           
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

		XII - other service-sector activities whose purpose is the 
		provision of services arising from the exercise of an intellectual activity, 
		of a technical, scientific, sporting, artistic or cultural nature, that 
		constitutes a regulated profession or not, provided they are not subject to 
		taxation pursuant to Annexes III, IV or V of this Complementary Law.                            
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 
		2014)      (Effective upon production of effects)

XII - other activities 
of the service sector that
have
as their purpose the provision of services arising 
from the exercise of an
intellectual activity,
of a
technical,
scientific, sporting, artistic
or cultural nature,
that
constitutes
a
regulated profession 
or not, 
provided they are not subject
to taxation
pursuant 
to
the 
Annexes
III or
IV of this
Complementary Law.                      

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 5-J.  The service-provision
activities
referred to
in
§
5-I shall be taxed
pursuant
to
Annex
III of this
Complementary Law
if the
ratio between
the 
payroll
and
the gross
revenue
of the
legal
entity is
equal to 
or
greater than
28%
(twenty-
eight percent
).                       

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§
5-K.  For the
calculation of the
ratio
referred to
in 
§§
5-J
and 5-M, 
shall be considered,
respectively, 
the amounts
paid
and earned 
in the twelve months
preceding
the
assessment
period
for the
purpose
of classification
under 
the
tax
regime 
of Simples
Nacional.                      

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§
5-L.  (VETOED).           

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§
5-M.  When the ratio
between the
payroll
and
the gross
revenue of the
microenterprise
or 
the
small
business
is 
below
28%
(twenty-
eight
percent),
the activities
provided for 
in
Annex
V 
of this 
Complementary Law
shall
be taxed
pursuant to:                 

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

I
- items
XVI, XVIII,
XIX, XX and 
XXI of
§ 5-B of this
article;                  

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

II
- § 5-D
of this
article.                   

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 6  
In the case of the services provided for in 

§ 2  
art. 6 of Complementary Law No. 116, of July 31, 
2003, 
rendered by microenterprises and small businesses, the recipient of the 
service shall withhold the corresponding amount pursuant to the legislation of the 
municipality where it is located, observing the provisions of § 4 
of art. 21 of this Complementary Law.

§ 7  
The specific-purpose company referred to in art. 56 of this 
Complementary Law that has acquired goods from a microenterprise or small 
business that is its partner, as well as the export trading company that 
has acquired goods from a company opting for Simples Nacional, for the specific 
purpose of export abroad, and that, within 180 (one hundred and eighty) 
days, counted from the date of issuance of the invoice by the seller, fails to prove 
its shipment abroad shall be subject to payment of all the taxes and 
contributions that were not paid by the selling company, plus 
late-payment interest and penalty, whether default or ex officio, calculated pursuant to the legislation 
governing the collection of unpaid tax, applicable to the specific-purpose 
company or to the export trading company itself.

§ 7  
		 The specific-purpose company referred to in art. 56 of this 
		Complementary Law that has acquired goods from a microenterprise or 
		small business that is its partner, as well as the export trading 
		company that has acquired goods or services from a company opting for Simples Nacional, for the specific purpose of export to 
		abroad, and that, within 180 (one hundred and eighty) days, counted from the date 
		of issuance of the invoice by the seller, fails to prove its shipment 
		abroad shall be subject to payment of all the taxes and 
		contributions that were not paid by the selling company, 
		plus late-payment interest and penalty, whether default or ex officio, calculated 
		pursuant to the legislation on the collection of unpaid tax, applicable to the 
		specific-purpose company or to the export trading company itself.                     
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 8   
For purposes of the provisions of § 7 of this article, the deadline 
for payment is deemed to have expired on the date on which the selling company should 
have made it, had the sale been made to the domestic market.

§ 9  
With respect to the employer social security contribution owed by the seller, the 
specific-purpose company referred to in art. 56 of this Complementary Law
or the 
export trading company shall pay, within the period provided for in § 8 
of this article, the amount corresponding to 11% (eleven percent) of the value of the 
goods not exported pursuant to § 7 of this article.

§ 10. In the case 
of § 7 of this article, the specific-purpose company 
referred to in art. 56 of this Complementary Law or the export trading company 
may not deduct from the amount owed any amount as a credit for 
the Tax on Manufactured Products - IPI, the Contribution to PIS/PASEP 
or COFINS, arising from the acquisition of the goods and services subject to the 
levy.

§ 11. In the case 
of § 7 of this article, the specific-purpose company or the 
export trading company shall also pay the taxes and contributions 
owed on sales to the domestic market, if, in any way, they have 
disposed of or used the goods.

§ 12. In assessing 
the amount owed in the month relative to each tax, the taxpayer that has 
revenue referred to in items IV and V of § 4 of this article shall be entitled to a 
reduction of the amount to be paid under Simples Nacional calculated pursuant 
to §§ 13 and 14 of this article.

§ 12.  In 
		assessing the amount owed in the month relative to each tax, for the 
		taxpayer that has revenue referred to in items I to III and V of § 
		4-A of this article, the reductions relating 
		to taxes already paid, or on which there has been 
		single-stage taxation, exemption, reduction or, in the case of ISS, where the amount 
		has been withheld or is owed directly to the Municipality, shall be considered.                   
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 13. For purposes 
of determining the reduction referred to in § 12 of this article, revenue shall be 
broken down into commercial, industrial or service-provision, pursuant 
to Annexes I, II, III, IV and V of this Complementary Law.

§ 13.  
		 For purposes of determining the reduction referred to in § 12 of this 
		article, revenue shall be broken down into commercial, industrial or 
		service-provision, pursuant to Annexes I, II, III, IV, V and VI of this 
		Complementary Law.                       
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 13.  For
the purpose
of 
determining 
the reduction
referred
to
in §
12 of this article, the
revenue shall be
broken down
into commercial,
industrial 
or
service 
provision,
pursuant 
to
the 
Annexes
I, II,
III, IV
and V of this
Complementary 
Law.                  

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 14. The reduction in the 
amount to be paid under Simples Nacional in the month relative to the amounts of 
revenue referred to in items IV and V of § 4 of this article 
shall correspond to:

§ 14.  The 
		reduction in the amount to be paid under Simples Nacional relative to the 
		amounts of revenue arising from export referred to in item IV 
		of § 4-A of this article shall correspond solely to the 
		percentages relating to Cofins, the Contribution to PIS/Pasep, IPI, 
		ICMS and ISS, set forth in Annexes I to VI of this Complementary Law.                   
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§
14.  The
reduction in the
amount to be
paid
under Simples
Nacional relative
to the amounts
of
revenue arising
from export
referred
to in item
IV of
§ 4-A of this
article
shall correspond
solely
to the effective rates
relating
to 
Cofins,
the Contribution
to
PIS/Pasep, 
IPI, ICMS
and
ISS,
assessed
on
the basis of
Annexes I
to V
of this Complementary
Law.      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects        

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

I - in the case of 
resale of goods:

a) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex I of this Complementary Law, relating to COFINS, applied 
to the respective portion of revenue referred to in items IV or V of § 4 
of this article, as the case may be;

b) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex I of this Complementary Law, relating to the Contribution 
to PIS/PASEP, applied to the respective portion of revenue referred to in 
items IV or V of § 4 of this article, as the case may be;

c) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex I of this Complementary Law, relating to ICMS, applied 
to the respective portion of revenue referred to in items IV or V of § 4 
of this article, as the case may be;

		I - (Repealed);                
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

II - in the case of 
sale of goods manufactured by the taxpayer:

a) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex II of this Complementary Law, relating to COFINS, 
applied to the respective portion of revenue referred to in items IV or V of § 
4 of this article, as the case may be;

b) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex II of this Complementary Law, relating to the Contribution 
to PIS/PASEP, applied to the respective portion of revenue referred to in 
items IV or V of § 4 of this article, as the case may be;

c) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex II of this Complementary Law, relating to ICMS, applied 
to the respective portion of revenue referred to in items IV or V of § 4 
of this article, as the case may be;

d) the percentage 
that would apply to the total amount of revenue, had there been no 
reduction, provided for in Annex II of this Complementary Law, relating to IPI, applied 
to the respective portion of revenue referred to in items IV or V of § 4 
of this article, as the case may be.

II - (Repealed).           
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 15. An electronic 
system shall be made available for performing the simplified calculation of the 
monthly amount owed under Simples Nacional.

§ 15-A.  The 
information provided in the electronic calculation system referred to in § 15:      

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

I - are of a 
declaratory nature, constituting a confession of debt and a valid and sufficient instrument 
for demanding the taxes and contributions that have not been paid, 
resulting from the information provided therein; and 

II - shall be 
provided to the Federal Revenue Secretariat of Brazil by the deadline 
for payment of the taxes owed under Simples Nacional in each month, 
with respect to the taxable events that occurred in the preceding month. 

§ 16.  In the case 
of § 12 of art. 3, the portion of gross revenue that exceeds the 
amount determined in § 10 of that article shall be subject to the maximum rates 
provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law, proportionally as the 
case may be, plus 20% (twenty percent).

§ 16.  In 
		the case of § 12 of art. 3, the portion of gross 
		revenue that exceeds the amount determined in § 10 of that article shall be 
		subject to the maximum rates provided for in Annexes I to VI of this 
		Complementary Law, proportionally as the case may be, plus 20% 
		(twenty percent).                
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 16.  In
the case of
§ 12
of art. 3, the portion
of gross
revenue
that exceeds the amount
determined
in
§ 10
of that
article shall be
subject to the maximum
rates 
provided for in Annexes I to V
of this
Complementary Law,
proportionally,
as
the case may be.                

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 16-A.  The 
provisions of § 16 also apply to the cases referred to in § 9 
of art. 3, as of the month in which the excess of the 
annual gross revenue limit occurs and until the month prior to the effects of exclusion. 

§ 17.  In the case 
of § 13 of art. 3, the portion of gross revenue that exceeds the 
amounts determined in § 11 of that article shall be subject, with respect to the 
percentages applicable to ICMS and ISS, to the maximum rates corresponding to 
those brackets provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law, 
proportionally as the case may be, plus 20% (twenty percent). 

§ 17.  In 
		the case of § 13 of art. 3, the portion of gross 
		revenue that exceeds the amounts determined in § 11 of that article 
		shall be subject, with respect to the percentages applicable to ICMS and ISS, 
		to the maximum rates corresponding to those brackets provided for in Annexes 
		I to VI of this Complementary Law, proportionally as the case may be, 
		plus 20% (twenty percent).               
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§
17.  In
the case of
§ 13
of art. 3, the portion
of gross
revenue
that exceeds the amounts
determined
in §
11
of that article
shall be 
subject, 
with respect
to the percentages 
applicable
to ICMS
and 
to
ISS, 
to the maximum 
rates
corresponding 
to those
brackets provided for
in Annexes
I to V
of this
Complementary
Law,
proportionally,
as the
case may be.     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects      

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

§ 17-A.  The 
provisions of § 17 also apply to the case referred to in § 1 
of art. 20, as of the month in which the excess of the annual gross revenue 
limit occurs and until the month prior to the effects of the impediment.      

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

§ 18.  The States, the 
Federal District and the Municipalities, within their respective jurisdictions, 
may establish, in the manner defined by the Management Committee, regardless of the 
gross revenue received in the month by the taxpayer, fixed monthly amounts for 
payment of ICMS and ISS owed by a microenterprise that earns gross revenue, 
in the preceding calendar year, of up to R$ 120,000.00 (one hundred and twenty thousand reais), 
with the microenterprise remaining subject to those amounts throughout the entire calendar year.

§ 18.  The 
		States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, within their respective 
		jurisdictions, may establish, in the manner defined by the Management Committee, 
		regardless of the gross revenue received in the month by the taxpayer, 
		fixed monthly amounts for payment of ICMS and ISS owed by a 
		microenterprise that earns gross revenue, in the preceding calendar year, up 
		to the maximum limit provided for in the second bracket of annual gross revenue 
		set forth in Annexes I to VI, with the microenterprise remaining subject to those 
		amounts throughout the entire calendar year, except as provided in § 18-A.                 
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 18-A.  The 
		microenterprise that, in the calendar year, exceeds the gross revenue limit 
		provided for in § 18 shall be barred from paying ICMS or ISS under the 
		fixed-amount system, as of the month following the occurrence of the 
		excess, becoming subject to the assessment of those taxes in the same manner as other 
		companies opting for Simples Nacional.                
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 19.  The amounts 
established in § 18 of this article may not exceed 50% (fifty 
percent) of the highest possible tax payment for the classification bracket 
provided for in the table of the caput of this article, respecting the additional amounts 
arising from the company's type of activity established in § 5 
of this article.

§ 20.  In the event that 
the State, the Municipality or the Federal District grants exemption or reduction of ICMS 
or ISS owed by a microenterprise or small business, or also 
determines payment of a fixed amount for those taxes, pursuant to § 18 of this 
article, a proportional reduction or adjustment of the amount to be paid shall be made, 
in the manner defined in a resolution of the Management Committee.

§ 20-A.  The granting of the 
benefits referred to in § 20 of this article may be carried out:

I - by exclusive and unilateral 
resolution of the granting State, Federal District or 
Municipality;

II - in a differentiated manner 
for each branch of activity.

§ 20-B.  The 
		Union, the States and the Federal District may, in a specific law 
		addressed to an ME or EPP opting for Simples Nacional, establish exemption 
		or reduction of COFINS, the Contribution to PIS/PASEP and ICMS for basic 
		basket products, specifying the scope of the grant.                 
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 21.  The amount to be 
paid pursuant to the provisions of § 20 of this article, exclusively in the case 
of exemption, shall not be included in the amount to be shared with the respective 
Municipality, State or Federal District.

§ 22.  (REPEALED)

§ 22-A.  The activity 
set forth in item XIV of § 5-B of this article shall pay ISS in a 
fixed amount, pursuant to municipal legislation.      

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

§ 22-B.  Accounting service 
offices, individually or through their 
class representative entities, shall:

I - promote 
free assistance regarding registration, the election referred to in 
art. 18-A 
of this Complementary Law and the first simplified annual return of the 
individual microentrepreneur, and may, for that purpose, through their 
class representative entities, enter into agreements with the Union, the States, the 
Federal District and the Municipalities, through their affiliated bodies; 

II - provide, in the 
manner established by the Management Committee, the results of quantitative and 
qualitative research relating to microenterprises and small businesses opting 
for Simples Nacional that they serve; 

III - promote 
tax, accounting and fiscal-guidance events for microenterprises and 
small businesses opting for Simples Nacional that they serve. 

§ 22-C.  In 
the event of non-compliance with the obligations referred to in § 22-B of this article, the 
office shall be excluded from Simples Nacional, with effects as of the month 
following the non-compliance, in the manner regulated by the Management Committee.

§ 23. From the ISS 
tax base, the material supplied by the service provider shall be deducted, for the services 
provided for in 

items 7.02 and 7.05 of the list of services annexed to Complementary Law No. 
116, of July 31, 2003.      

	(See Complementary Law 
	No. 214, of 2025)  
	Effective upon production of effects

§ 24. For purposes 
of applying Annex V of this Complementary Law, payroll is deemed to be, 
including charges, the amount paid, in the 12 (twelve) months preceding the 
assessment period, as remuneration to individuals arising from 
work, including pro-labore withdrawals, plus the amount actually 
paid as employer social security contribution and to FGTS. 

§ 24.  For purposes of applying Annexes V and VI of this 
		Complementary Law, payroll is deemed to be, including charges, the 
		amount paid, in the 12 (twelve) months preceding the assessment period, 
		as remuneration to individuals arising from work, 
		including pro-labore withdrawals, plus the amount actually 
		paid as employer social security contribution and to 
		FGTS.             
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)    
(Effective upon production of effects)

§ 24.  For
the purpose
of applying § 5-K, 
payroll is deemed to be, including 
charges, the amount 
paid,
in the 
twelve
months preceding the period
of
assessment, as
remuneration
to
individuals
arising
from
work, plus
the
amount 
actually 
paid as
employer social security
contribution and
to FGTS, including withdrawals
of
pro-labore.                 

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
Effective upon production of effects

§ 25.  For purposes 
of the provisions of § 24 of this article, only the remuneration reported 
pursuant to 

item IV of the caput of art. 32 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24, 
1991, shall be considered.

§ 26.  Amounts paid as 
rent and profit distribution are not considered for purposes of the provisions of § 24, 
observing the provisions of § 1 
of art. 14.

§
		27.  (VETOED).            

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      
		Effective upon production of effects
Art. 18-A.  The
Individual Microentrepreneur - MEI may opt for the collection of the taxes and
contributions covered by the Simples Nacional in fixed monthly amounts,
regardless of the gross revenue earned by it in the month, in the manner provided
in this article.

§ 1o
For the purposes of this Complementary Law, MEI means the individual entrepreneur
referred to in

art. 966 of Law No. 10,406, of January 10, 2002
(Civil Code), who has earned gross revenue, in the previous calendar year, of
up to R$ 60,000.00 (sixty thousand reais), an optant of the Simples Nacional and who is not
barred from opting for the system provided for in this article.

§
1o  For
the purposes
of this
Complementary
Law,
MEI means
the individual entrepreneur
who
falls
within the definition
of the

art.
966
of Law No.
10,406, of
10
January
2002
- Civil Code, or
the entrepreneur who carries out
the activities
of manufacturing,
trading,
and providing
of services
in the
rural
sphere, who has earned gross revenue, in the previous calendar year,
of up to
R$ 81,000.00
(eighty-
one
thousand
reais),
who is
an optant of the
Simples
Nacional and is not
barred
from opting
for the
system
provided for
in this article.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 1º For the purposes of this Complementary Law, MEI means
whoever has earned gross revenue, in the previous calendar year, of up to R$
81,000.00 (eighty-one thousand reais), who is an optant of the Simples Nacional and
is not barred from opting for the system provided for in this article, and is an
individual entrepreneur who falls within the definition of art. 966 of Law No. 10,406,
of January 10, 2002 (Civil Code), or the entrepreneur who carries out:
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

I - the activities referred to in § 4-A of this article;
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

II - the activities referred to in § 4-B of this article
established by the CGSN; and
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

III - the activities of manufacturing, trading, and
providing of services in the rural sphere.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

§ 2º  In the case of
commencement of activities, the limit referred to in § 1o shall be
R$ 5,000.00 (five thousand reais) multiplied by the number of months between
the start of the activity and the end of the respective calendar year, with fractions
of months counted as one whole month.

§
2o  In
the case of commencement
of activities,
the limit
referred to in
§ 1o
shall be
R$ 6,750.00
(six
thousand,
seven hundred and fifty
reais)
multiplied
by the number of
months
between
the start
of the activity
and the
end
of the respective
calendar year,
with fractions
of
months
counted
as
one
whole month.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 3º While the
option for the collection system provided for in the caput of this article is in effect:

I  the provisions of
§ 18 of art. 18 of this Complementary Law do not apply;

II  the reduction
provided for in § 20 of art. 18 of this Complementary Law, or any deduction
from the tax base, does not apply;

III - the specific exemptions for micro-enterprises and small businesses
granted by the State, Municipality, or Federal District as of July 1,
2007 that fully cover the annual gross revenue bracket up to the
limit provided for in § 1º do not apply;

IV  the option for
classification as an Individual Microentrepreneur implies the option for the payment
of the contribution referred to in item X of § 1o of art. 13 of this
Complementary Law, in the manner provided for in

§ 2º of art. 21 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24, 1991;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

V  the
Individual Microentrepreneur shall pay, in the manner regulated by the Management
Committee, a fixed monthly amount corresponding to the sum of the following installments:

V  the MEI,
with
annual gross revenue equal
to or less than R$ 81,000.00
(eighty-
one
thousand reais),
shall pay,
in the
manner
regulated
by the Management Committee, a
fixed
monthly
amount corresponding to the sum
of the following
installments:

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect   (See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

a) R$ 45.65
(forty-five reais and sixty-five centavos), on account of the  contribution
provided for in item IV of this paragraph;

b) R$ 1.00 (one
real), on account of the tax referred to in item VII of the caput of art. 13
of this Complementary Law, if a taxpayer of ICMS; and

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

c) R$ 5.00 (five
reais), on account of the tax referred to in item VIII of the caput of art. 13
of this Complementary Law, if a taxpayer of ISS;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

				d)

	   (See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects
				(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

				e)

				(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects
				(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

VI  without prejudice
to the provisions of §§ 1o to 3o of art. 13, the MEI
shall be exempt from the taxes referred to in items I to VI of the caput of that
article, except as provided in art. 18-C.

§ 4o
The MEI may not opt for the collection system provided for in the caput of this
article if:

I  its activity
is taxed under Annexes IV or V of this Complementary Law, except with authorization
relating to the exercise of an isolated activity in the manner regulated by the Management
Committee;

I - whose
		activity is taxed in the manner of Annexes V or VI of this Complementary
		Law, except with authorization relating to the exercise of an isolated
		activity in the manner regulated by the CGSN;
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

II - it has more than one
establishment;

III - it participates in
another company as owner, partner, or manager; or

IV - it employs a
worker.                     (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(In force)

V - constituted in the form of a startup.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 4º-A.  Subject to
the other conditions of this article, the individual entrepreneur who carries out
the trading and processing of products of an extractive nature may opt for the collection
system provided for in the caput.

§ 4º-B.  The  CGSN
shall determine the activities authorized to opt for the collection system
referred to in this article, in a manner that avoids the weakening of labor
relations, as well as on the levy of ICMS and ISS.

§ 5º  The option
referred to in the caput of this article shall be made in the manner to be established in
an act of the Management Committee, observing that:

I - it shall be irrevocable for
the entire calendar year;

II - it shall be made
at the start of the calendar year, in the manner regulated by the Management Committee,
producing effects as of the first day of the calendar year of the option,
except as provided in item III;

III - it shall produce effects
as of the date of commencement of activity, provided it is exercised under the terms, deadline, and
conditions to be established in an act of the Management Committee referred to in the
caput of this paragraph.

§ 6º  The
removal from the system referred to in the caput of this article shall be
carried out ex officio or by means of communication from the MEI.

§ 7º  The
removal by means of communication from the MEI to the Federal Revenue Secretariat of
Brazil - RFB shall occur:

I - by option, which must
be made at the start of the calendar year, in the manner regulated by the Management
Committee, producing effects as of January 1st of the calendar year of the
communication;

II - mandatorily,
when the MEI falls under any of the situations provided for in § 4º of this
article, the communication being made by the last business day of the month
following that in which the barring situation occurred, producing effects
as of the month following the occurrence of the barring situation;

III - mandatorily,
when the MEI exceeds, in the calendar year, the gross revenue limit provided for in §
1º of this article, the communication being made by the last business day
of the month following that in which the excess occurred, producing effects:

a) as of January 1st
of the calendar year following the occurrence of the excess, in the
event the limit was not exceeded by more than 20% (twenty percent);

b) retroactively to January 1st
of the calendar year of the occurrence of the excess, in the event the
limit was exceeded by more than 20% (twenty percent);

IV - mandatorily,
when the MEI exceeds the gross revenue limit provided for in § 2º of this
article, the communication being made by the last business day of the month
following that in which the excess occurred, producing effects:

a) as of January 1st
of the calendar year following the occurrence of the excess, in the
event the limit was not exceeded by more than 20% (twenty percent);

b) retroactively to the
start of activity, in the event the limit was exceeded by more
than 20% (twenty percent).

§ 8º  The
ex officio removal shall occur when the failure to communicate referred to in § 7º of
this article is found.

§ 9º  The Individual
Entrepreneur removed from the collection system provided for in the caput
of this article shall pay the taxes owed under the general rule of the Simples
Nacional as of the date the effects of the removal begin, except as
provided in § 10 of this article.

§ 10.  In the cases
provided for in item a of items III and IV of § 7º of this article, the MEI
must pay the difference, without additions, in a single installment, together with
the assessment for the month of January of the calendar year following that of the excess, in the
manner to be established in an act of the Management Committee.

§ 11.  The amount
referred to in item a of item V of § 3o of this article
shall be readjusted, in the manner provided for in ordinary law, on the same date of
readjustment of the benefits referred to in

Law No. 8,213, of July 24, 1991,
in a manner that maintains equivalence with the contribution referred to in
§ 2º of art. 21 of Law No.
8,212, of July 24, 1991.

§ 12.  The provisions of
§ 4º of art. 55
and of

§ 2º of art. 94, both of Law No. 8,213, of July 24, 1991,
apply to the MEI who has opted for the contribution in the manner of § 1o
of this article, except if it opts for the supplementation of the social security
contribution referred to in

§ 3o
of art. 21 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24, 1991.

§ 13.  The MEI is
exempt, except as provided in art. 18-C of this Complementary Law, from:

I - complying with the
provisions of

item IV of the caput of art. 32 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24
1991;

II - submitting the
Annual Social Information Report (Rais); and

III - declaring
the absence of a taxable event to the Caixa Econômica Federal for the issuance of the Certificate
of Fiscal Regularity before the FGTS.

§ 14.  The Management
Committee shall regulate the provisions of this article.

§ 15.  The
failure to pay the amount provided for in item a of item V of § 3o
has as a consequence the non-counting of the delinquent contribution period for purposes
of the qualifying period for obtaining the respective social security benefits.

§ 15-A.
		 The States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities are authorized to
		grant remission of the debts arising from the amounts provided for in the
		items b and c of item V of § 3o,
		unpaid separately or simultaneously.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 15-B.  The MEI's registration may be automatically canceled after a period of
		12 (twelve) consecutive months without payment or filings,
		regardless of any notification, and the information must be
		published on the Entrepreneur Portal, in the manner regulated by the CGSIM.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 16.  The CGSN
shall establish, for the MEI, differentiated criteria, procedures, deadlines, and effects
for removal from the system referred to in this article, for
collection, registration in active debt, and exclusion from the Simples Nacional.

§ 16-A
 The
deregistration
of the
MEI via
electronic
portal exempts the communication
to the bodies
of the public
administration.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 17.  The alteration
of data in the CNPJ reported by the entrepreneur to the Federal Revenue Secretariat of
Brazil shall be equivalent to the mandatory communication of removal from the collection
system referred to in this article, in the following cases:

I - change to a
legal nature different from that of an individual entrepreneur referred to in

 art.
966 of Law No. 10,406, of January 10, 2002
(Civil Code);

II - inclusion of
an economic activity not authorized by the CGSN;

III - opening of a
branch.

		§ 18.  The
		Municipalities may only cancel the MEI's registration
		if they have their own risk classification regulation and the
		respective simplified registration and legalization process, in
		accordance with this Complementary Law and with the CGSIM resolutions.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 19.
		 Representative councils of economic categories are prohibited from
		requiring obligations other than those stipulated in this Complementary Law
		for the registration of the MEI in their ranks, under penalty of liability.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

§ 19-A  The
MEI registered
with the professional
council
of its category as a
natural
person
is exempt
from
making a new
registration
with the
same
council
as an
individual
entrepreneur.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§
19-B.  Professional
councils
are prohibited,
under penalty
of liability, from
requiring
registration
and carrying
out
any
kind of
enforcement
action
when the occupation
of the MEI
does not require professional
registration
of the natural
person.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		§ 20.  The
		tax documents of micro-enterprises and small businesses may
		be issued directly by a national computerized system and via the
		internet, at no cost to the entrepreneur, in the manner regulated
		by the Simples Nacional Management Committee.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 21.
		 Registration in the official records shall be ensured for the tour guide
		registered as MEI.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 22.
		 Public service concessionaires are prohibited from increasing the tariffs
		paid by the MEI on account of the change of its status from natural person
		to legal entity.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 23.
		 (VETOED).
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 24.
		 The provisions of item XI of § 4o of
		art. 3o apply to the MEI.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 25.
		The MEI may use its residence as the seat of the establishment,
		when the existence of a separate location for the
		exercise of the activity is not essential.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 154, of 2016)

Art. 18-B.  The
company that contracts services performed through the MEI retains, in
relation to this contracting, the obligation to pay the contribution
referred to in item III of the caput and

§ 1o of art. 22 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24, 1991,
and to comply with the ancillary obligations relating to the contracting of
an individual contributor.
(See Complementary Law No.
147, of 2014)

§ 1º  The provisions of the
caput apply in relation to the MEI who is contracted to provide
plumbing, electrical, painting, masonry, carpentry, and vehicle
maintenance or repair services.

§ 1o
		 The provisions of this article apply exclusively in relation to the MEI who
		is contracted to provide plumbing, electrical,
		painting, masonry, carpentry, and vehicle maintenance or repair services.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 2º  The provisions of the
caput and of § 1o do not apply when the elements of an employment relationship
are present, in which case the contracting party shall be subject to all
obligations arising therefrom, including labor, tax, and
social security obligations.

Art. 18-C.  Subject to the
provisions of
 art. 18-A, and its paragraphs, of this Complementary Law, the individual entrepreneur who
has a single employee who
earns exclusively 1 (one) minimum wage or the salary floor of the
professional category may be classified as MEI.

Art. 18-C.
 Subject to the
provisions of the caput
and of §§ 1o
to 25
of art. 18-A of this
Complementary Law,
the individual entrepreneur or the
entrepreneur
who
carries out the
activities
of manufacturing,
trading
and providing
of services
in the
rural
sphere who
has
a single
employee
who earns
exclusively
one minimum
wage
or the
salary
floor
of the
professional
category may be classified as
MEI.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 1º  In the case
referred to in the caput, the MEI:

I - must withhold and
pay the social security contribution relating to the insured person working for it, in the
manner provided by law, observing the deadline and conditions established by the CGSN;

II - is required to provide
information relating to the insured person working for it, in the manner established by the CGSN;
and

III - is subject to the payment of the contribution referred to in
 item VI of the caput of art.
13, calculated at the rate of 3% (three percent) on the
salary of contribution provided for in the caput, in the manner and within the deadlines
established by the CGSN.

§ 2º  In cases
of the legal absence of the MEI's sole employee, the hiring of
another employee shall be permitted, including for a fixed term, until the conditions of the
absence cease, in the manner established by the Ministry of Labor and Employment.

§ 3º  The CGSN may
determine, with respect to the MEI, the form, frequency, and deadline:

I - for the submission to the
Federal Revenue Secretariat of Brazil of a single return with data
relating to taxable events, tax base, and amounts of the taxes provided for
in arts. 18-A and 18-C, of the contribution to Social Security withheld from the
employee, and the Severance Indemnity Fund (FGTS), and other
information of interest to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, the National
Social Security Institute (INSS), and the FGTS Trustee Council, observing the
provisions of § 7o of art. 26;

II - for the payment of the
taxes provided for in arts. 18-A and 18-C, as well as the FGTS and the contribution
to Social Security withheld from the employee.

§ 4o
The submission of the single return referred to in item I of § 3o
shall replace, in the manner regulated by the CGSN, the obligation to submit
all the information, forms, and returns to which the other
companies or equivalent entities that hire employees are subject, including those relating to
the payment of the FGTS, to the Annual Social Information Report (Rais), and to the
General Register of Employed and Unemployed Persons (Caged).

§ 5o
In the case of payment of the FGTS in the manner of item II of § 3o,
the transfer of the funds and the identifying elements
of the payment to the manager of that fund must be ensured for credit to the linked
account of the worker.

§ 6o
		 The document referred to in item I of § 3o
of this article has a declaratory nature, constituting a valid and
sufficient instrument for the assessment of the taxes and of the land-related debts that have not
been paid, resulting from the information provided in it.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		Art. 18-D.  Municipal taxation of the urban real estate
		tax must ensure more favorable treatment for the MEI for
		carrying out its activity at the same place where it resides, by
		applying the lowest rate in effect for that location, whether
		residential or commercial, under the terms of the law, without prejudice to any
		existing exemption or immunity.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		Art. 18-E.  The MEI institute is a public policy whose
		purpose is the formalization of small businesses and social
		and social security inclusion.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 1o
		 The formalization of MEI does not have an eminently economic or
		fiscal character.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 2o
		 Every benefit provided for in this Complementary Law applicable to micro-enterprises
		extends to the MEI whenever it is more favorable to it.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 3o
		 The MEI is a form of micro-enterprise.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 4o
		 It is prohibited to impose restrictions on the MEI with respect to the exercise of a
		profession or participation in bidding processes, on account of its
		legal nature.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

§ 4o  It is
prohibited
to impose
restrictions
on the MEI
with respect
to the exercise
of a profession
or participation
in
bidding processes,
on
account
of its
legal nature, including
on the occasion
of the contracting
of the services
provided for
in § 1o
of art.
18-B
of this
Complementary Law.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		§
5o  The
entrepreneur
who carries out
the activities
of manufacturing,
trading
and providing
of services
in the
rural
sphere
who
registers
as
MEI
shall not
lose
the status
of
special
insured person of Social
Security.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		§
6o  The
provisions
of §
5o and
the simplified
licensing
of activities
for the
entrepreneur
who carries out
the activities
of manufacturing,
trading
and providing
of services in the
rural
sphere shall be regulated
by the
CGSIM
within
one hundred
and eighty
days.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		§
7o  The
entrepreneur
who carries out
the activities
of manufacturing, trading
and providing
of services
in the
rural
sphere shall retain
all of its obligations
relating to the status of rural producer or
of a family
farmer.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Art. 18-F. For the self-employed cargo carrier registered
as MEI, under the terms of art. 18-A of this Complementary Law:
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

I - the gross revenue limit referred to in § 1º and item V of § 3º of art.
18-A of this Complementary Law shall be R$ 251,600.00 (two hundred and fifty-one thousand
six hundred reais);

(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

II - the limit shall be R$ 20,966.67 (twenty thousand nine hundred and sixty-six reais
and sixty-seven centavos) multiplied by the number of months between
the start of the activity and the end of the respective calendar year, with fractions
of months counted as one whole month, in the case of commencement of activities referred to
in § 2º of art. 18-A of this Complementary Law;
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

III - the monthly amount of the contribution referred to in item X of § 1º of art. 13
of this Complementary Law shall correspond to the amount resulting from the application of the
rate of 12% (twelve percent) on the monthly minimum wage.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 188, of 2021)

Art. 19. Without
prejudice to the possibility of adopting all the revenue brackets provided for in
Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law, the States may opt for the application of a sub-limit for purposes of collection of ICMS under the Simples Nacional in
their respective territories, as follows:

Art. 19.
		 Without prejudice to the possibility of adopting all the revenue brackets
		provided for in Annexes I to VI of this Complementary Law, the States may
		opt for the application of a sub-limit for purposes of collection of ICMS in
		the manner of the Simples Nacional in their respective territories, as
		follows:
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending
		effect)

Art. 19.  Without
prejudice
to the possibility of adopting
all the
revenue brackets
provided for
in Annexes
I to
V
of this
Complementary Law,
the States
whose share
of Brazilian
Gross
Domestic Product
is up to 1% (one
percent)
may opt
for the
application of
a sub-limit
for purposes
of collection
of ICMS in the
manner
of the Simples
Nacional in their
respective
territories,
for
companies
with
annual gross revenue of up to
R$ 1,800,000.00
(one
million and
eight hundred
thousand reais).

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

		I - the States
whose share of Brazilian Gross Domestic Product is up to 1% (one percent)
may opt for the application, in their respective territories, of the annual gross
revenue brackets up to 35% (thirty-five percent), or up to 50% (fifty
percent), or up to 70% (seventy percent) of the limit provided for in item II of the
caput of art. 3o;

(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(In force)

		II - the States
whose share of Brazilian Gross Domestic Product is more than 1% (one percent)
and less than 5% (five percent) may opt for the application, in their
respective territories, of the annual gross revenue brackets up to 50% (fifty
percent) or up to 70% (seventy percent) of the limit provided for in item II of the
caput of art. 3o; and

(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(In force)

III - the States
whose share of Brazilian Gross Domestic Product is equal to or greater than
5% (five percent) are required to adopt all the annual gross revenue
brackets.

(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(In force)

§ 1o
The share of Brazilian Gross Domestic Product shall be assessed taking into account
the last result published by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics or another body that replaces it.

§ 2o
The option provided for in items I and II of the caput, as well as the obligation
provided for in item III of the caput, shall take effect only
for the following calendar year, unless otherwise decided by the CGSN.

§ 2o  The
option provided for
in the caput
shall take effect
only
for the following calendar year,
unless
otherwise decided
by the CGSN.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 3o
The provisions of this article apply to the Federal District.

§
4o  For
the States
that
have not
adopted
a sub-limit
in the manner
of the caput and for those whose share
of Brazilian
Gross
Domestic Product
is greater
than 1% (one percent), for purposes of collection of ICMS and ISS, the sub-limit shall
mandatorily be observed
in the
amount
of R$
3,600,000.00
(three
million
six hundred
thousand reais).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Art. 20. The option
made in the manner of art. 19 of this Complementary Law by the States shall entail the adoption
of the same annual gross revenue limit for purposes of collection under the
manner of the ISS of the Municipalities located therein, as well as for the ISS due in the Federal
District.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 1º The small business
that exceeds the limits referred to in items I or II of
the caput of art. 19 shall be automatically barred from collecting the ICMS and the
ISS in the manner of the Simples Nacional, as of the month following that in which
the excess occurred, with respect to its establishments located in the
unit of the Federation that has adopted them, except as
provided for in §§ 11 and 13
of art. 3o.

§
1o  The
small business
that exceeds the limits
referred to in
the caput
and § 4o
of art.
19
shall be
automatically
barred
from collecting the ICMS
and the
ISS in the
manner
of the Simples
Nacional,
as
of the month
following
that
in which
the excess has occurred, with respect
to its
establishments
located
in the unit
of the Federation that has
adopted them, except
as provided
for in §§ 11
and 13 of
art. 3o.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 1º-A.  The effects
of the bar provided for in § 1º shall occur in the following calendar year
if the excess found is not greater than 20% (twenty percent) of the
limits referred to.

§ 2o  The
provisions of § 1o of this article do not apply in the event the
State or the Federal District adopts, compulsorily or by choice, the
application of a gross revenue bracket higher than the one that was being used in the
calendar year in which the excess of gross revenue occurred.

§ 3o
In the case where the collection of ICMS or ISS is not being made
through the Simples Nacional by force of the provisions of this article and of art. 19
of this Complementary Law, the Simples Nacional revenue brackets higher
than the one that has been the subject of the choice by the States or by the Federal District
shall be subject, for purposes of collection under the Simples Nacional, to a reduction in the rate
equivalent to the percentages relating to those taxes set forth in
Annexes I to
V of this Complementary Law, as the case may be.

§ 3o
		 In the case where the collection of ICMS or ISS is not being
		made through the Simples Nacional by force of the provisions of this article
		and of art. 19 of this Complementary Law, the Simples
		Nacional revenue brackets higher than the one that has been the subject of the choice by the States
		or by the Federal District shall be subject, for purposes of
		collection under the Simples Nacional, to a reduction in the rate equivalent to the percentages
		relating to those taxes set forth in Annexes I to VI of this Complementary
		Law, as the case may be.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending
		effect)

§ 3o  In
the
case
in which
the collection
of ICMS
or of
ISS
is not being made
through
the
Simples
Nacional by
force
of the provisions of this
article
and of
art.
19
of this Complementary
Law,
the revenue
brackets of the Simples
Nacional
higher
than the one that
has
been the subject
of the choice by the
States
or by the
Federal
District
shall be subject,
for purposes
of collection under the
Simples
Nacional,
to a reduction
of the effective
rate
of those
taxes,
determined
in accordance
with
Annexes
I to
V of this
Complementary Law,
as
the case may be.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 4o
The Management Committee shall regulate the provisions of this article and of art. 19 of this
Complementary Law.

Section IV

On the Collection of the
Taxes Owed

Art. 21.  The taxes
owed, assessed in the manner of
 arts. 18 to 20 of this Complementary Law, must be
paid:

I - by means of a single
collection document, instituted by the Management Committee;

II - (REPEALED)

III - until it is
regulated by the Management Committee, by the last business day of the first fortnight of the
month following that to which it refers;

IV - at a bank belonging to
the Simples Nacional collection network, in the manner regulated by the Management
Committee.

§ 1o  In
the case of a micro-enterprise or small business having branches, the
payment of the Simples Nacional taxes shall be made through the head office.

§ 2o
A simplified Simples Nacional collection system may be adopted,
including without the use of the banking network, upon request of the State,
Federal District, or Municipality to the Management Committee.

§ 3o  The
amount not paid by the due date shall be subject to legal charges
in the manner provided for in the income tax legislation.

§ 4º The withholding at
source of ISS of micro-enterprises or small businesses that are optants of the
Simples Nacional shall only be permitted if the provisions of

art. 3o of Complementary Law No. 116, of July 31, 2003, are observed,
and the following rules must be observed:

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

I
the
rate applicable in the withholding at source must be stated
in the tax document and shall correspond to the ISS percentage provided for in Annexes III, IV, or V of this
Complementary Law for the gross revenue bracket to which the micro-enterprise or the
small business is subject in the month prior to the provision of the services;

		I - the
		rate applicable in the withholding at source must be stated in the
		tax document and shall correspond to the ISS percentage provided for in
		Annexes III, IV, V, or VI of this Complementary Law for the revenue
		bracket to which the micro-enterprise or the small business is subject
		in the month prior to the provision of the services;
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending
		effect)

I -
the rate
applicable
in the withholding
at
source
must be
stated
in the tax
document
and shall correspond to the
effective
rate
of ISS
to which
the micro-enterprise
or the
small business
is
subject in the
month
prior to
the provision;

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		II  in the event
that the service subject to withholding is provided in the month of commencement of activities of the
micro-enterprise or small business, the party receiving the services must apply the
rate corresponding to the ISS percentage referring to the lowest rate provided for
in Annexes III, IV, or V of this Complementary Law;

		II - in the
		event that the service subject to withholding is provided in the month
		of commencement of activities of the micro-enterprise or small business,
		the party receiving the services must apply the rate corresponding to the ISS
		percentage referring to the lowest rate provided for in Annexes III, IV, V, or
		VI of this Complementary Law;
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending
		effect)

II
- in the
event that
the
service
subject to
withholding
be provided
in the month of
commencement of
activities
of the
micro-enterprise
or the
small
business, the party receiving the services must be
applied
the effective
rate
of 2%
(two percent);

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

III  in the case
of item II of this paragraph, if a difference is found between the
rate used and the rate actually assessed, it shall be up to the micro-enterprise or small
business providing the services to pay this difference in the
month following the start of activity, using the Municipality's own collection form;

IV  in the case
where the micro-enterprise or small business is subject to ISS taxation
under the Simples Nacional at fixed monthly amounts, the withholding referred to in
the caput of this paragraph shall not apply;

V  in the event
that the micro-enterprise or small business does not report the rate referred to in
items I and II of this paragraph in the tax document, the rate
corresponding to the ISS percentage referring to the highest rate provided for in
Annexes III, IV, or V of this Complementary Law shall apply;

V - in the
		event that the micro-enterprise or small business does not report the
		rate referred to in items I and II of this paragraph in the tax
		document, the rate corresponding to the ISS percentage referring to
		the highest rate provided for in Annexes III, IV, V, or VI of this
		Complementary Law shall apply;
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending
		effect)

V -
in the event
that the
micro-enterprise
or the
small
business does not report
the rate
of which
items
I and
II of this
paragraph
treat
in the tax
document,
the effective
rate
of 5%
(five percent)
shall apply;

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

VI  the liability
of the service provider shall not be exempted when the ISS rate
reported in the tax document is lower than that owed, in which case the
payment of this difference shall be made using the Municipality's own collection form;

VII  the amount
withheld, duly paid, shall be final, not being subject to sharing with
the municipalities, and no ISS shall be levied under the Simples Nacional on the revenue
from the provision of services that was subject to withholding.

§ 4o-A.
In the case referred to in items I and II of § 4o, the
falsification in the provision of this information shall subject the person responsible, the owner, the
partners, or the managers of the micro-enterprise and the small business,
together with the other persons who contribute to it, to the penalties
provided for in criminal and tax legislation.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 5o
The CGSN shall regulate the offsetting and refund of Simples Nacional
amounts paid unduly or in an amount greater than owed.

§ 6o
The amount to be refunded or offset shall be increased by interest obtained through the
application of the reference rate of the Special System for Settlement and Custody (Selic)
for federal securities, accumulated monthly, as of the month following that of the
undue or excess payment until the month prior to the offsetting
or refund, and by 1% (one percent) with respect to the month in which it is being
made.

§ 7o
Amounts offset unduly shall be charged with the late-payment increases referred to
in art. 35.

§ 8o
In the case of undue offsetting, when the falsity of a declaration
submitted by the taxpayer is proven, the taxpayer shall be subject to an isolated fine
applied at the percentage provided for in

item I of the caput of art. 44 of Law No. 9,430, of December 27,
1996,
applied twofold, and shall have as its tax base the total amount of the debt
unduly offset.

§ 9o
It is prohibited to use credits not assessed under the Simples Nacional,
including of a non-tax nature, to extinguish debts of the Simples
Nacional.

§ 10.  Credits
assessed under the Simples Nacional may not be used to extinguish other
debts owed to the Public Treasuries, except upon the ex officio offsetting
arising from a granted refund proceeding or after the exclusion of the
company from the Simples Nacional.

§ 11.  Under the Simples
Nacional, only the offsetting of credits to extinguish debts owed to the same
federative entity and relating to the same tax is permitted.

§ 12.  In the
refund and offsetting under the Simples Nacional, the limitation periods
provided for in

Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code), shall be observed.

§ 13.  The assignment
of credits to extinguish debts under the Simples Nacional is prohibited.

§ 14.  The procedure
established by the CGSN shall apply to refund and offsetting proceedings.

§ 15.  The CGSN
is competent to set criteria, conditions for termination, deadlines, minimum amortization
amounts, and other procedures for the installment payment of overdue tax
debts assessed under the Simples Nacional, subject to the provisions of § 3º
of this article and of art. 35, and except as provided in § 19 of this article.
 (See Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 16.  The debts referred to
in § 15 may be paid in up to 60 (sixty) monthly installments, in the
manner and conditions provided for by the CGSN.                      (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 17.  The amount of each
monthly installment, at the time of payment, shall be increased by interest equivalent
to the reference rate of the Special System for Settlement and Custody (Selic) for
federal securities, accumulated monthly, calculated as of the month following
that of the consolidation until the month prior to the payment, and by 1% (one percent)
with respect to the month in which the payment is being made, in the manner
regulated by the CGSN.                      (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 18.  A new
installment agreement shall be permitted for debts under an installment agreement in progress or that has been
terminated, and new debts may be included, in the manner regulated by the
CGSN.                   (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 19.  Debts
constituted separately by a State, the Federal District, or a
Municipality, due to the absence of an application for unified assessment, relating
to a tax within its competence, that are not registered in Active Debt of the
Union, may be paid in installments by the entity responsible for the assessment in accordance
with the respective legislation, in the manner regulated by the CGSN.                   (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 20.  A granted request for
installment payment implies an irrevocable confession of the debt and constitutes
an extrajudicial confession.                    (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 21.  The reductions of
ex officio assessment fines provided for in federal legislation shall be applied in the
consolidation, in accordance with CGSN regulation.                       (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 22.  The transfer to the
federative entities of the amounts paid and of the amortization of the installment debts shall be
made proportionally to the value of each tax in the composition of the
consolidated debt.                       (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 23.  In the case of
installment payment of a debt registered in active debt, the debtor shall pay costs,
fees, and other legal charges.                      (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

§ 24.  Failure to
pay shall result in the immediate termination of the installment agreement and referral of the debt for registration in active debt or
continuation of the enforcement proceeding, as the case may be, until a decision by the CGSN, in the case of failure of
payment:                 (See Complementary
Law No. 155, of 2016)

I - of 3 (three) installments,
consecutive or not; or

II - of 1 (one) installment,
all others having been paid.

§ 25.  The document
provided for in item I of the caput of this article must contain the
itemized allocation of each of the taxes covered by the Simples Nacional, as well as
the amounts allocated to each federative entity.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

		Art. 21-A.  The registration of a micro-enterprise or small business in the
		Federal Public Sector Unpaid Credits Information Registry
		- CADIN, shall only occur upon prior notice with a deadline for
		contestation.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending
		effect)

		Art. 21-B.  The States and the Federal District must observe, in
		relation to the ICMS, a minimum period of 60 (sixty) days, counted from
		the first day of the month of the taxable event of the tax obligation, in order to
		establish the due date of the tax owed by tax substitution,
		single-stage (mono-phase) concentrated taxation, and by
		tax anticipation with or without closure of taxation, in the
		cases where the liability falls on subsequent transactions or supplies,
		in the manner regulated by the Management Committee.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

Section V

On the Transfer of the Proceeds
of Collection
Art. 22.  The Management Committee
shall define the system for transferring the total amount collected, including legal charges,
to the:

Art. 22. The CGSN shall define the system for transferring the total
amount collected, including legal charges, to the:
(Wording
given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

I - Municipality or Federal
District, the amount corresponding to the ISS;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

II - State or Federal
District, the amount corresponding to the ICMS;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

III - National Institute
of Social Security, the amount corresponding to the Contribution for maintenance of
Social Security.

IV - Management Committee of the Tax on Goods and Services (CGIBS),
the amount corresponding to the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS), except as
provided in items V and VI of this caput;
 (Added
by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

V -
Municipality, or the Federal District, of the establishment, the amount corresponding to
50% (fifty percent) of the amount of IBS collected by the MEI; and

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

VI -
State, or the Federal District, of the establishment, the amount corresponding to 50%
(fifty percent) of the amount of IBS collected by the MEI.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

Sole paragraph.  While
the Management Committee does not regulate the deadline for the transfer provided for in item II of
the caput of this article, it shall be made within the deadlines established in the
agreements entered into within the collegiate body referred to in

subparagraph g of item XII of § 2 of art. 155 of the Federal Constitution.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

Section VI

Of Credits

Art. 23.  Microenterprises
and small businesses that have opted for Simples Nacional shall not be entitled
to appropriate nor shall they transfer credits relating to taxes or contributions
covered by Simples Nacional.

§ 1  Legal
entities and those treated as such by tax legislation that have not opted
for Simples Nacional shall be entitled to a credit corresponding to the ICMS levied
on their purchases of goods from a microenterprise or small business
that has opted for Simples Nacional, provided they are intended for resale or
manufacturing and observing, as a limit, the ICMS actually owed by the
Simples Nacional opting companies in relation to such purchases.

§ 2  The rate
applicable to the calculation of the credit referred to in § 1 of this article shall
be stated on the tax document and shall correspond to the ICMS percentage set forth
in Annexes I or II of this Complementary Law for the gross revenue bracket to which the
microenterprise or small business was subject in the month prior to the
transaction.

§ 3  Where
the transaction occurs in the month in which the microenterprise or small
business opting for Simples Nacional begins its activities, the rate applicable to the calculation
of the credit referred to in § 1 of this article shall correspond to the ICMS percentage
referring to the lowest rate set forth in

Annexes I or II of this Complementary Law.

§ 4  The provisions
of §§ 1 to 3 of this article shall not apply when:

I - the microenterprise or
small business is subject to ICMS taxation under Simples Nacional
by fixed monthly amounts;

II - the microenterprise or
small business does not state the rate referred to in § 2
of this article on the tax document;

III - there is an exemption
established by the State or Federal District covering the gross revenue
bracket to which the microenterprise or small business is subject in the month
of the transaction.

 IV - the sender of the
transaction or provision of services considers, by choice, that the rate determined pursuant to
the
caput and §§ 1 and 2 of
art. 18 of this Complementary Law
shall apply to the revenue received in the month.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

§ 5  Upon
exclusive and unilateral resolution by the States and the Federal District, a credit
may be granted to legal entities and those treated as such by tax
legislation that have not opted for Simples Nacional, corresponding to the ICMS
levied on inputs used in goods purchased from an industry
opting for Simples Nacional, and it is prohibited to establish a differentiation
in the credit amount based on the origin of such goods.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

§ 6  The Management
Committee of Simples Nacional shall regulate the provisions of this article.

§ 7 For the fiscal years of 2025 and 2026, the provisions of the caput of this article
shall not apply to the case of a credit assessment made as
a full or partial refund of remaining tax residue in the
production chain of exported goods, as provided for in
arts. 21 to 29 of Law No.
13,043, of November 13, 2014.
(Added by Complementary Law No. 216, of 2025)

Art. 24.  Microenterprises
and small businesses opting for Simples Nacional may not
use or allocate any amount as a tax incentive.

Sole paragraph.  Any
changes in tax bases, rates and
percentages or other factors that alter the amount of tax or contribution
assessed under Simples Nacional, established by the Union, State, Federal
District or Municipality, shall not be considered, except those provided for or authorized in this Complementary Law.

§ 1
 Any
changes in tax bases, rates and
percentages or other factors that alter the amount of tax or contribution
assessed under Simples Nacional, established by the Union, State, Federal
District or Municipality, shall not be considered, except those provided for or authorized in this Complementary Law.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 2
 (VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Section VII

Of Ancillary Tax
Obligations

Art. 25. The
microenterprise or small business opting for Simples Nacional shall
annually submit to the Brazilian Federal Revenue Secretariat a single
and simplified declaration of socioeconomic and tax information, which shall be
made available to the tax and social security oversight bodies,
observing the deadline and form approved by the CGSN and observing the provisions of
§ 15-A
of art. 18.

§ 1 The
declaration referred to in the caput of this article constitutes a confession of
debt and an adequate and sufficient instrument for demanding taxes and
contributions that have not been paid resulting from the information
provided in it.

§ 2
The status of inactivity shall be stated in the declaration referred to in the
caput of this article, in the manner regulated by the Management Committee.

§ 3
For the purposes of § 2 of this article, a microenterprise or
small business that does not present any change in equity or operational
activity throughout the entire calendar year shall be considered in a status of
inactivity.

	(See Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

	Pending effect

§ 4
The declaration referred to in the caput of this article, relating to the MEI defined
in art. 18-A of this Complementary Law, shall contain, for the purposes of
art. 3 of
Complementary Law No. 63, of January 11, 1990,
only the information relating to the total gross revenue subject to ICMS,
it being prohibited to establish additional declarations as a result of the said
Complementary Law.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

§ 5
		 The declaration referred to in the caput, as from the
		information relating to the calendar year 2012, may be provided by
		means of the declaration referred to in § 15-A of art. 18 of this Complementary
		Law, at the periodicity and within the deadlines defined by the CGSN.    (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

				Art. 25-A. The data from tax
		documents and declarations of any kind shall be shared among the
		tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District and
		the Municipalities, in the manner established by the CGSN.
				 (Added
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

				Art. 25-B. The MEI, defined in art. 18-A,
		shall annually submit to the Special Secretariat of the Brazilian Federal
		Revenue a single and simplified declaration of socioeconomic and
		tax information, observing the deadline and form approved by the CGSN.
				 (Added
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

				Sole paragraph. The information in the
		declaration referred to in the caput has a declaratory nature,
		constituting a confession of debt and an adequate and sufficient instrument for
		demanding taxes and contributions that have not been paid
		resulting from the information provided in it.
				 (Added
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

Art. 26.  Microenterprises
and small businesses opting for Simples Nacional are required to:

I - issue a tax
document for sale or provision of services, in accordance with instructions issued by the
Management Committee;

II - keep in good order and
custody the documents that supported the assessment of the taxes and contributions
owed and the fulfillment of the ancillary obligations referred to in art. 25
of this Complementary Law until the statute-of-limitations period has elapsed and any
actions pertinent to them are no longer time-barred.

				II - keep in good order and custody the
		documents that supported the assessment of the taxes and contributions
		owed and the fulfillment of the ancillary obligations referred to in
		arts. 25 and 25-B of this Complementary Law until the statute-of-limitations
		period has elapsed and any actions pertinent to them are no longer time-barred.
				 (Wording
given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

 § 1  The MEI shall
prove gross revenue by presenting the record of sales or of
provision of services in the manner established by the CGSN, being exempt from
issuing the tax document provided for in item I of the caput, except in the
cases of mandatory issuance provided for by the said Committee.

I - (REVOKED)

II - (REVOKED)

III - (REVOKED)

 § 2  The
other microenterprises and small businesses, in addition to the provisions of
items I and II of the caput of this article, shall also keep the
cash book in which their financial and banking transactions shall be recorded.

 § 3  The
requirement of a single declaration referred to in the
caput of art. 25 of this
Complementary Law does not exempt the reporting of information relating to third parties.

				§ 3 The requirement of the declarations referred
		to in arts. 25 and 25-B does not exempt the reporting of information
		relating to third parties.
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

 § 4  The
microenterprises and small businesses referred to in § 2
of this article are subject to other ancillary obligations to be established
by the Management Committee, with nationally uniform characteristics, and
the establishment of unilateral rules by the political units participating in the
system is prohibited.

		§ 4
		 It is prohibited to require ancillary tax obligations relating to
		taxes assessed under Simples Nacional beyond those stipulated
		by the CGSN and met through the Simples Nacional Portal, as well as
		the establishment of additional and unilateral requirements by the
		federative entities, except for tax citizenship programs.    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 4-A.
		 Digital tax bookkeeping or an equivalent obligation may not be
		required from a microenterprise or small business opting for Simples
		Nacional, unless, cumulatively, there is:    (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		I - specific authorization from the CGSN, which shall establish the conditions for the
		requirement;    (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		II - the provision
		by the requiring tax administration of a free application
		for use by the opting company.   (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

				II - the provision by the requiring tax
		administration of a free program for use by the
		opting company.
				 (Wording
		given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

		§ 4-B.
		 The requirement to submit tax records in electronic form shall
		apply only in the case of substituting the delivery in conventional
		form, the requirement of which has been previously and specifically
		established by the CGSN.    (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 4-C.
		 Until the implementation of a uniform national system established by the CGSN
		with information sharing among federated entities, a rule
		published by a federated entity up to the first quarter of
		2014 that has conveyed a current requirement for a microenterprise or small
		business to submit digital tax bookkeeping or an equivalent
		obligation shall remain valid.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

 § 5  The
microenterprises and small businesses are subject to the submission of an electronic
declaration that must contain data regarding services provided to or received from third
parties, as provided by the Management Committee.

 § 6  In the case
of § 1 of this article:

I - the tax documents
evidencing the entry of goods and services received during the
period, as well as the tax documents relating to transactions or
provisions occasionally issued, must be attached to the record of sales
or of provision of services, in the manner regulated by the Management Committee;

II - the issuance of a
tax document shall be mandatory for sales and provisions of services made
by the MEI to a recipient registered in the National Register of Legal Entities (CNPJ),
being exempt from this issuance for the final consumer.

 § 7  It is up to the
CGSN to provide for the requirement of digital certification for the fulfillment of
principal and ancillary obligations by the microenterprise, including the MEI,
or small business opting for Simples Nacional, including for the
payment of the FGTS.

		§ 8
		 The CGSN may regulate the availability, on the
		Simples Nacional portal, of an electronic tax document for sale or
		provision of services for the MEI, microenterprise or small
		business opting for Simples Nacional.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 9
		 The development and maintenance of technology solutions,
		training and guidance for users regarding the provisions of § 8,
		as well as other matters relating to Simples Nacional, may be supported
		by the Brazilian Micro and Small Business Support Service - SEBRAE.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 10.  The
		act of issuing or receiving a tax document by electronic means
		established by the tax administrations, in any modality,
		of entry, exit or provision, in the manner established by the CGSN,
		represents its own tax bookkeeping and a sufficient element for the
		grounding and establishment of the tax credit.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 11.  The
		data from tax documents of any kind may be
		shared among the tax administrations of the Union, States,
		Federal District and Municipalities and, when issued by electronic means, in the
		manner established by the CGSN, the microenterprise or small business
		opting for Simples Nacional is exempted from transmitting its data
		to the tax administrations.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 12.  The
		information to be provided relating to the ICMS owed as provided for
		in subparagraphs a, g and h of item XIII
		of § 1 of art. 13 shall be provided by means of a
		single application.   (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)
		(Pending effect)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

				§ 12-A. Tax bookkeeping, under the terms
		of § 4-A, results in the exemption from providing the information provided for
		in § 12.
				(Added by
		Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

				(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

		§ 13.
		 The mandatory use of electronic tax documents established by Confaz
		is established for transactions and provisions
		relating to ICMS carried out by microenterprises and small
		businesses in the cases provided for in subparagraphs a, g
		and h of item XIII of § 1 of art. 13.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

		§ 14.  The
		applications necessary to comply with the provisions of §§ 12 and 13 of this
		article shall be made available, free of charge, on the Simples
		Nacional portal.    (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

		§ 15.  The
		CGSN shall regulate the provisions of this article.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

Art. 27.  Microenterprises
and small businesses opting for Simples Nacional may,
optionally, adopt simplified accounting for the records and controls
of the transactions carried out, in accordance with regulation by the Management Committee.

Section VIII

Of Exclusion from Simples
Nacional

Art. 28.  Exclusion from
Simples Nacional shall be carried out ex officio or by means of communication from the
opting companies.

 Sole paragraph.  The
rules provided for in this section and the manner of their implementation shall be regulated
by the Management Committee.

Art. 29.  Ex officio
exclusion of companies opting for Simples Nacional shall occur when:

I - a failure to
communicate a mandatory exclusion is found;

II - obstruction
of oversight is offered, characterized by the unjustified refusal to display
books and documents they are required to present, as well as the failure to provide
information about assets, financial transactions, business or activity that
they are summoned to present, and in the other cases that authorize the
requisitioning of police assistance;

III - resistance to
oversight is offered, characterized by the refusal of access to the
establishment, tax domicile or any other place where their activities are
carried out or where their property is found;

IV - its incorporation
occurs through interposed persons;

V - a repeated
practice of violation of the provisions of this Complementary Law has been found;

VI - the company is
declared unfit, in the manner set forth in arts. 81 and
82 of Law No. 9,430, of December 27,
1996, and subsequent amendments;

VII -
it sells goods that are the object of smuggling or contraband;

VIII - there is
a failure to keep the cash book or it does not allow the identification of
financial transactions, including banking transactions;

IX - it is
found that, during the calendar year, the amount of expenses paid exceeds by 20%
(twenty percent) the amount of revenue received during the same period, excluding the
year of commencement of activity;

X - it is found
that during the calendar year the amount of purchases of goods for
resale or manufacturing, except in justified cases of
inventory increase, exceeds 80% (eighty percent) of the revenue received
during the same period, excluding the year of commencement of activity;

XI - there is
repeated non-compliance with the obligation contained in item I of the caput of
art. 26;

XII - it repeatedly
omits from the company's payroll or from a document of information
required by social security, labor or tax legislation an insured
employee, casual worker or individual taxpayer who provides it services.

 §
1
In the cases provided for in items II to XII of the
caput of this
article, the exclusion shall take effect from the very month in which they occurred,
barring the option for the differentiated and favored regime of this Complementary Law
for the next 3 (three) subsequent calendar years.

 § 2  The
period referred to in § 1 of this article shall be increased to 10
(ten) years if the use of a device, ruse or any
other fraudulent means that induces or maintains oversight in error, with the aim
of suppressing or reducing the payment of tax assessable under the special regime
provided for in this Complementary Law, is found.

 § 3  Ex officio
exclusion shall be carried out in the manner regulated by the Management Committee,
with the assessment of taxes and contributions falling to the respective taxing
entities.

 § 4
(REVOKED)

 § 5  The
authority for ex officio exclusion from Simples Nacional follows the provisions of

art. 33, and the administrative judgment follows the provisions of art. 39, both of this Complementary
Law.

 § 6  In the cases
of exclusion provided for in the caput, notification:

I - shall be made by the
federative entity that carried out the exclusion; and

II - may be made by
electronic means, observing the regulations of the CGSN.

 § 7  (REVOKED)

 § 8  The notification
referred to in § 6 applies to the denial of the option for Simples
Nacional.

 § 9  A repeated
practice, for the purposes of items V, XI and XII of the caput, is considered to be:

I - the occurrence, in 2
(two) or more consecutive or alternating assessment periods, of identical
infractions, including of an ancillary nature, found in relation to the last 5
(five) calendar years, formalized by means of an infraction notice or
assessment notification; or

II - the second occurrence
of identical infractions, if the use of a device, ruse or
any other fraudulent means that induces or maintains oversight in error,
with the aim of suppressing or reducing the payment of tax, is found.

Art. 30.  Exclusion from
Simples Nacional, by means of communication from microenterprises or small
businesses, shall occur:

I - by option;

II - mandatorily,
when they fall into any of the prohibited situations provided for in this Complementary
Law; or

III -
mandatorily, when, in the calendar year of commencement of activity, the
proportional gross revenue limit referred to in § 2 of
art. 3 is exceeded;

IV -
mandatorily, when, in the calendar year, the gross revenue
limit provided for in item II of the caput of art. 3 is exceeded, when
not in the calendar year of commencement of activity.

§ 1
The exclusion must be communicated to the Federal Revenue Secretariat:

I - in the case of
item I of the caput of this article, by the last business day of the month of January;

II - in the case
of item II of the caput of this article, by the last business day of the month
following the one in which the prohibited situation occurred;

III - in the case
of item III of the caput:

a) by the last
business day of the month following the one in which the proportional limit referred to in § 10 of art. 3
has been exceeded by more than 20% (twenty
percent); or

b) by the last
business day of the month of January of the calendar year following the one of commencement of
activities, if the excess is less than 20% (twenty percent) of the respective
limit;

IV - in the case
of item IV of the caput:

a) by the last
business day of the month following the exceeding by more than 20% (twenty percent) of the
gross revenue limit provided for in item II of the caput of art. 3;
or

b) by the last
business day of the month of January of the following calendar year, in the case of not having
exceeded by more than 20% (twenty percent) the gross revenue limit provided for
in item II of the caput of art. 3.

 § 2  The
communication referred to in the caput of this article shall occur in the manner to be
established by the Management Committee.

 § 3  A change
in data in the CNPJ, reported by the ME or EPP to the Brazilian Federal
Revenue Secretariat, shall be equivalent to the mandatory communication of exclusion from Simples Nacional in the
following cases:

I - a change in legal
nature to a Corporation (Sociedade Anônima), a Partnership Limited by Shares (Sociedade Empresária em Comandita por Ações), an Undisclosed
Partnership (Sociedade em Conta de Participação) or an Establishment, in Brazil, of a Foreign
Company;

II - inclusion of an economic
activity prohibited from the Simples Nacional option;

III - inclusion of a legal
entity partner;

IV - inclusion of a partner
domiciled abroad;

V - partial spin-off; or

VI - extinction of the company.

Art. 31.  Exclusion of
microenterprises or small businesses from Simples Nacional shall take
effect:

I - in the case of
item I of the caput of art. 30 of this Complementary Law, as of January 1
of the following calendar year, except as provided in § 4
of this article;

II - in the case
of item II of the caput of art. 30 of this Complementary Law, as of the month
following the occurrence of the barring situation;

III - in the case
of item III of the caput of art. 30 of this Complementary Law:

a) from the beginning
of activities;

b) as of January 1
of the following calendar year, in the case of not having exceeded by
more than 20% (twenty percent) the proportional limit referred to in
§ 10 of art.
3;

IV - in the case
of item V of the caput of art. 17 of this Complementary Law, as of the
following calendar year to that of the awareness of the communication of the exclusion;

V - in the case of
item IV of the caput of art. 30:

a) as of the month
following the exceeding by more than 20% (twenty percent) of the
gross revenue limit provided for in item II of art. 3;

b) as of January 1
of the following calendar year, in the case of not having exceeded by
more than 20% (twenty percent) the gross revenue limit provided for in
item II of
art. 3.

§ 1
In the case provided for in item III of the caput of art. 30 of this Complementary
Law, the microenterprise or small business may not opt, in the
following calendar year to that of commencement of activities, for Simples Nacional.

§ 2
In the case of items V and XVI of the caput of art. 17, the legal entity
shall be permitted to remain an opting party for Simples Nacional upon
proof of the regularization of the debt or of the tax registration within a period of up to 30
(thirty) days counted from the awareness of the communication of the exclusion.

§ 2 In the case of

items V and XVI of the caput of art. 17
of this Complementary Law, the legal entity shall be permitted to remain an opting party for
Simples Nacional upon proof of the regularization of the debt
or of the tax registration within a period of up to 90 (ninety) days counted from the
awareness of the communication of the exclusion.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 216, of 2025)

§ 3
The CGSN shall regulate the procedures relating to the barring from paying the
ICMS and the ISS under Simples Nacional, in view of the exceeding of the limits
established under items I or II of art. 19 and art. 20.

§ 4
In the event that the microenterprise or small business is excluded from Simples
Nacional in the month of January, in the case of item I of the caput of art. 30
of this Complementary Law, the effects of the exclusion shall occur in that same year.
(See Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

§ 5
In the case of item II of the caput of this article, once the reason for the exclusion
ceases to exist, there being a retroactive ex officio exclusion in the case of
item I of the
caput of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, the effect thereof shall occur as
of the month following the occurrence of the barring situation, limited, however, to
the last day of the calendar year in which said situation ceased to exist.

Art. 32.  Microenterprises
or small businesses excluded from Simples Nacional shall be subject, as
of the period in which the effects of the exclusion are processed, to the taxation
rules applicable to other legal entities.

 § 1
For the purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article, in the case of subparagraph a
of
item III of the caput of art. 31 of this Complementary Law, the microenterprise
or small business that has been de-framed shall be subject to payment of the
totality or the difference of the respective taxes and contributions, owed in
accordance with the general rules of incidence, plus, only,
default interest, when made before the start of an ex officio procedure.

 § 2
For the purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article, the taxpayer may
choose to pay the income tax and the Social Contribution on
Net Profit under the deemed profit regime, or the quarterly or annual actual profit regime.

§ 3  The provisions
of the caput and § 1 apply in relation to the ICMS and the
ISS to a company barred from paying these taxes under Simples Nacional,
in view of the exceeding of the limits referred to in items I and II of the
caput of art. 19, in relation to the establishment located in the federative unit
that has adopted them.

Section IX

Of Oversight

Art. 33. The
authority to oversee compliance with the principal and ancillary obligations
relating to Simples Nacional and to verify the occurrence of the cases
provided for in art. 29 of this Complementary Law rests with the Federal Revenue Secretariat and
the Finance or Treasury Secretariats of the State or the Federal District,
according to the location of the establishment, and, in the case of provision of
services included in the municipal tax authority, the authority shall be
also that of the respective Municipality.

Art. 33. The authority to oversee compliance with the
principal and ancillary obligations relating to Simples Nacional and to
verify the occurrence of the cases provided for in art. 29 of this Complementary Law
rests with the Special Secretariat of the Brazilian Federal Revenue of the Ministry of Finance and
the finance or treasury secretariats of the State, of the Federal District or of the
Municipality.      (Wording
given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

§ 1
The Finance or Treasury Secretariats of the States may enter into an agreement with
the Municipalities under their jurisdiction to assign to them the oversight referred to
in the caput of this article.

§ 1-A.
The agreement referred to in § 1 is waived in the case of
the occurrence of provision of services subject to the ISS by an establishment
located in the Municipality.

§ 1-B.
The oversight referred to in the caput, once initiated, may cover all
the other establishments of the microenterprise or small business,
regardless of the activity carried out by them or their location, in the manner
and conditions established by the CGSN.

§ 1-C.
The tax authorities referred to in the caput have the authority to make
the assessment of all the taxes provided for in items I to VIII of art. 13,
assessed under Simples Nacional, in relation to all the establishments
of the company, regardless of the instituting federated entity.

§ 1-D.
The authority to issue an infraction notice for non-compliance with an ancillary obligation is
exclusive to the tax administration before which the obligation should have
been fulfilled.

§ 2
In the case of the microenterprise or small business carrying out any of the
service-provision activities provided for in § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary
Law, the oversight of the Social Security Contribution owed by the
company, referred to in

art. 22 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24,
1991, shall fall to the Brazilian Federal Revenue Secretariat.

 § 3  The
unpaid amount, assessed in an oversight procedure, shall be demanded in an
ex officio assessment by the competent authority that carried out the oversight.

 § 4  The
Management Committee shall regulate the provisions of this article.

Section X

Of the Omission of Revenue

Art. 34.  All the
presumptions of omission of revenue existing in the governing legislation of the
taxes and contributions included in Simples Nacional apply to the microenterprise
and the small business opting for Simples Nacional.

§ 1  It
is
permitted
to render
mutual
assistance
and
to
exchange
information
between
the Federal
Treasury
and those
of the States,
the Federal District and
the
Municipalities,
relating to
microenterprises
and small
businesses,
for
purposes
of planning
or
carrying out
tax
or preparatory
procedures.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 2
 (VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 3
 Without prejudice
to individual
tax action,
tax
administrations may
use a prior notification
procedure aimed at
self-regularization,
in the manner
and within the
deadlines
to be
regulated
by the CGSN, which
shall not constitute
the commencement of a tax
procedure.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§
4  (VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

Section XI

Of the Legal Additions

Art. 35.
The rules relating to interest and
default and ex officio penalties provided for the income tax apply to the taxes and contributions owed by the microenterprise and the small
business, registered with Simples Nacional, including, when
applicable, in relation to the ICMS and the ISS.

Art. 36. The failure
to communicate, when mandatory, the exclusion of the legal entity from Simples
Nacional, within the deadlines determined in § 1 of art. 30 of this Complementary
Law, shall subject the legal entity to a penalty corresponding to 10% (ten percent)
of the total taxes and contributions owed in accordance with the
Simples Nacional in the month preceding the commencement of the effects of the exclusion, not
less than R$ 200.00 (two hundred reais), not subject to reduction.

Art. 36-A.  The
failure to communicate, when mandatory, the de-framing of the
individual microentrepreneur from the collection system provided for in
art.
18-A of this Complementary Law within the deadlines determined in its § 7
shall subject the individual microentrepreneur to a penalty in the amount of R$ 50.00 (fifty
reais), not subject to reduction.

Art. 37. The
imposition of the penalties referred to in this Complementary Law does not exclude the application
of the sanctions provided for in criminal legislation, including in relation to false
declaration, adulteration of documents and issuance of a tax invoice not in accordance with
the transaction actually carried out, to which the owner or partner of
the legal entity is subject.

Art. 38. The taxpayer
who fails to submit the Simplified Legal Entity Declaration referred to
in art. 25 of this Complementary Law, within the set deadline, or who
submits it with inaccuracies or omissions, shall be summoned to submit the
original declaration, in the case of non-submission, or to provide clarifications, in the other
cases, within the deadline stipulated by the tax authority, in the manner defined by the Management
Committee, and shall be subject to the following penalties:

I - 2% (two percent)
per calendar month or fraction thereof, levied on the amount of the taxes and
contributions reported in the Simplified Legal Entity Declaration, even
if fully paid, in the case of failure to deliver the declaration or delivery
after the deadline, limited to 20% (twenty percent), observing the provisions of § 3
of this article;

II - R$ 100.00 (one hundred
reais) for each group of 10 (ten) incorrect or omitted pieces of information.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

 § 1
For the purposes of applying the penalty provided for in item I of the caput of this
article, the initial term shall be considered to be the day following the end of the
period originally set for the delivery of the declaration and the final term the date of the
actual delivery or, in the case of non-submission, the date of drawing up the infraction
notice.

 § 2
Observing the provisions of § 3 of this article, the penalties shall be
reduced:

I - by half, when the
declaration is submitted after the deadline, but before any ex officio
procedure;

II - to 75% (seventy
five percent), if the declaration is submitted within the deadline set in a
notice.

 § 3  The
minimum penalty to be applied shall be R$ 200.00 (two hundred reais).

 § 4
A declaration that does not meet the technical specifications established by the
Management Committee shall be considered not delivered.

 § 5  In
the case of § 4 of this article, the taxpayer shall be summoned
to submit a new declaration, within a period of 10 (ten) days, counted from the awareness of the
notice, and shall be subject to the penalty provided for in item I of the caput of this
article, observing the provisions of §§ 1 to 3
of this article.

§ 6
The minimum penalty referred to in § 3 of this article to be applied
to the Individual Microentrepreneur during the validity of the option referred to in
art. 18-A
of this Complementary Law shall be R$ 50.00 (fifty reais).

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effect

Art. 38-A.  The
taxpayer who fails to provide the information in the electronic calculation
system referred to in § 15 of art. 18, within the deadline provided for in § 15-A of the same
article, or who provides it with inaccuracies or omissions, shall be summoned to do so,
in the case of non-submission, or to provide clarifications, in the other cases, within the
deadline stipulated by the tax authority, in the manner defined by the CGSN, and
shall be subject to the following penalties, for each reference month:

I - 2% (two
percent) per calendar month or fraction thereof, as of the first day of the fourth month
of the year following the occurrence of the taxable events, levied on the amount
of the taxes and contributions arising from the information provided in the electronic
calculation system referred to in § 15 of art. 18, even if fully
paid, in the case of absence of the provision of information or its provision after the
deadline, limited to 20% (twenty percent), observing the provisions of § 2
of this article; and

				I - 2% (two percent) per calendar month
		or fraction thereof, as of the day following the end
		of the period originally set for the delivery of the declaration, levied
		on the amount of the taxes and contributions arising from the
		information provided in the electronic calculation system referred to in §
		15 of art. 18, even if fully paid, in the case of absence of the
		provision of information or its provision after the deadline, limited to 20%
		(twenty percent), observing the provisions of § 2 of this article; and
				(Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

II - R$ 20.00
(twenty reais) for each group of 10 (ten) incorrect or omitted pieces of information.

§ 1
For the purposes of applying the penalty provided for in item I of the caput, the initial term shall be
considered to be the first day of the fourth month of the year following the
occurrence of the taxable events and the final term the date of the actual provision
or, in the case of non-provision, the date of drawing up the infraction notice.

				§ 1 For the purposes of applying the penalty
		provided for in item I of the caput, the initial term shall be
		considered to be the day following the end of the period originally set for the
		delivery of the declaration and the final term the date of the actual provision or,
		in the case of non-provision, the date of drawing up the infraction notice.

		 (Wording given
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effect

§ 2
The minimum penalty to be applied shall be R$ 50.00 (fifty reais) for each reference
month.

§ 3
The provisions of §§ 2, 4
and 5 of art. 38 apply to the provisions of this article.

				§ 3 Observing the provisions of § 2, the
		penalties shall be reduced:
				(Wording given
				by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

				I - by half, when the declaration is
		submitted after the deadline, but before any ex officio procedure;
				(Added by
				Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

				II - to 75% (seventy five percent),
		if the declaration is submitted within the deadline set in a notice.
				(Added by
				Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

§ 4  The
CGSN may establish a date later than
that provided for in item I of the caput and in § 1.

				§ 5 A declaration that does not meet the
		technical specifications established by the CGSN shall be
		considered not delivered.
				(Added by
				Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

				§ 6 In the case provided for in § 5, the
		taxpayer shall be summoned to submit a new declaration, within a period of
		10 (ten) days, counted from the awareness of the notice, and shall be subject to the penalty
		provided for in item I of the caput, observing the provisions of §§
		1 and 2.
				(Added by
				Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

				Pending effect

		Art. 38-B.  The penalties relating to the failure to provide or the incorrectness in
		the fulfillment of ancillary obligations to federal, state, district and
		municipal bodies and entities, when in a fixed or
		minimum amount, and in the absence of a legal provision of specific and more
		favorable amounts for the MEI, microenterprise or small business,
		shall be reduced by:
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		I - 90%
		(ninety percent) for the MEI;
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		II - 50% (fifty
		percent) for microenterprises or small businesses opting
		for Simples Nacional.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		Sole paragraph.  The reductions referred to in items I and II of the
		caput do not apply in the:
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		I - case of fraud, resistance or obstruction of oversight;
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

		II - absence of payment of the penalty within 30 (thirty) days after the
		notification.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)      (Pending effect)

Section XII

Of the Tax
Administrative Proceeding

Art. 39.  The administrative
litigation relating to Simples Nacional shall be within the authority of the
adjudicating body that is part of the administrative structure of the federative entity that made the
assessment, the denial of the option or the ex officio exclusion, observing the
legal provisions relating to the tax administrative proceedings of that entity.
Art. 39. Subject to the legal provisions relating to the
tax administrative proceedings of each federative entity and to what is provided in
relation to the IBS tax administrative proceeding, the administrative
litigation relating to Simples Nacional shall fall under the competence:

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

I - of the
adjudicating bodies within the federal tax administrative structure,
when it concerns the assessment, the denial of the option, or the ex officio exclusion
carried out by the Special Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of Brazil;

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

II - of the
States, the Federal District and Municipalities, through the CGIBS, when it concerns the
assessment, the denial of the option, or the ex officio exclusion carried out by them
as a result of the IBS;

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

III -
of the adjudicating bodies within the administrative structure of the State,
Federal District or Municipality that carried out the assessment, the denial of the option
or the ex officio exclusion not related to the IBS.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

 § 1o  The
Municipality may, by means of an agreement, transfer the adjudicating authority
exclusively to the respective State in which it is located.

§ 1º In the case of item III of the caput of this article,
the Municipality may, by means of an agreement, transfer the adjudicating authority
exclusively to the respective State in which it is located.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

 § 2o In the
case where the Simples Nacional taxpayer carries out activities included within
the scope of incidence of ICMS and ISS and an omission of revenue whose
origin cannot be identified is found, the assessment shall be made using the highest
rate provided for in this Complementary Law, and the assessed portion that does not
correspond to federal taxes and contributions shall be apportioned among States
and Municipalities or the Federal District.

§ 2º-A. In the case where an omission of revenue is found,
whose origin cannot be identified in relation to the Simples Nacional taxpayer,
the assessment shall use the highest rate provided for in this Complementary Law.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

 § 3o  In the
case referred to in § 2o of this article, adjudication shall fall to the
State or the Federal District.

 § 4º  Electronic notice
of administrative litigation acts shall observe the provisions of
 §§ 1o-A through 1o-D of art. 16.

§ 5º  The challenge
relating to the denial of the option or to the exclusion may be decided by a body
other than that provided for in the caput, in the manner established by the respective
tax administration.

§ 5º The challenge relating to the denial of the option or
to the exclusion may be decided by a body other than that provided for in items I through III
of the caput of this article, in the manner established by the respective
tax administration.
 (Text given
by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

 § 6º  In the case
provided for in § 5o, the CGSN may regulate procedures and
deadlines, as well as, in the exclusion process, provide for suspensive effect where
a challenge, defense or appeal is filed.

Art. 40.  Inquiries
relating to Simples Nacional shall be resolved by the Secretariat of Federal
Revenue, except when they concern taxes and contributions falling within state
or municipal competence, which shall be resolved in accordance with the respective
tax competence, in the manner regulated by the Comitê Gestor.

Section XIII

Of Judicial Proceedings

Art. 41.  Proceedings
relating to taxes and contributions covered by Simples Nacional shall be
brought against the União, which shall be represented in court by the
Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional, subject to the provisions of § 5º
of this article.

 § 1o  The
States, the Federal District and Municipalities shall provide assistance to the Procuradoria-Geral da
Fazenda Nacional, in relation to taxes within their competence, in the manner to be
regulated by an act of the Comitê Gestor.

 § 2º  Tax
credits arising from the application of this Complementary Law shall be assessed,
recorded in the Dívida Ativa da União, and judicially collected by the
Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional, subject to the provisions of item V of § 5º
of this article.

 § 3o
By means of an agreement, the Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional may delegate to the
States and Municipalities the recording in state and municipal outstanding debt and the
judicial collection of state and municipal taxes referred to in this Complementary
Law.

 § 4o  The
provisions of this article apply to taxes and contributions that have not been
paid resulting from the information provided:

				§ 4º The
provisions of this article apply to taxes and contributions that have not been
paid resulting from the information provided in the returns referred to in
arts. 25 and 25-B.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Effects to take place

				§ 4º The provisions of this article apply
				to taxes and contributions that have not been paid
				resulting from the information provided in the returns referred to in
				§ 15 of art. 18 and arts. 25 and 25-B.

				(Text given by Complementary Law
				No. 227, of 2026)

I - in the
electronic system for calculating the amounts due under Simples Nacional referred to in
§
15 of art. 18;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Effects to take place
(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

I -

(Repealed);

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

II - in the return
referred to in art. 25.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Effects to take place
(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

II -

(Repealed);

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

§ 5º
Excepted from the provisions of the caput of this article are:

I - writs of
mandamus challenging acts of a coercive authority belonging to a State,
the Federal District or a Municipality;

II - actions
dealing exclusively with taxes within the competence of the States, the Federal
District or the Municipalities, which shall be brought against those federative
entities, represented in court by their respective attorneys' offices;

III - actions
brought under the agreement referred to in § 3º
of this article;

IV - the
tax credit arising from a notice of infraction issued exclusively for
failure to comply with an ancillary obligation, subject to the provisions of § 1o-D
of art. 33;

V - the tax
credit relating to ICMS and ISS referred to in § 16 of art. 18-A.

		V - the
		tax credit relating to ICMS and ISS referred to in items
		b and c of item V of § 3o of
art. 18-A of this Complementary Law.   (Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Effects to take place

CHAPTER V

OF
ACCESS TO MARKETS

Sole Section

Of Public Procurement

		CHAPTER V

		(Text given by Complementary
		Law No. 147, of 2014)

		OF ACCESS TO
		MARKETS

		Section I

		Of Public
		Procurement

Art. 42.  In public
procurement procedures, proof of tax compliance status of microenterprises and small
businesses shall only be required for purposes of signing the contract.

Art. 42.  In
public
procurement
procedures, proof
of tax and
labor
compliance
status of
microenterprises
and of
small
businesses
shall only
be required
for purposes of
signing
the
contract.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place
(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021)

Art. 43.  Microenterprises
and small businesses, when taking part in bidding processes, shall present all
documentation required for purposes of proving tax compliance status, even if it presents any
restriction.

Art. 43.
Microenterprises
and
small
businesses,
when taking
part in
bidding
processes,
shall present
all the
documentation
required for
purposes of
proving
tax and labor
compliance status,
even
if it
presents
any restriction.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place
(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021

 § 1o
Should there be any restriction in proving tax compliance status, a period of 2 (two)
business days shall be granted, running from the moment the bidder is declared the
winner of the process, extendable for an equal period, at the discretion of the Public
Administration, for regularizing the documentation, paying or settling the
debt in installments, and issuing any negative certificates or positive certificates with
the effect of a negative certificate.

§ 1o
		 Should there be any restriction in proving tax compliance status, a
		period of 5 (five) business days shall be granted, running from the moment
		the bidder is declared the winner of the
		process, extendable for an equal period, at the discretion of the public
		administration, for regularizing the documentation, paying or settling
		the debt in installments, and issuing any negative certificates or positive certificates with
		the effect of a negative certificate.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§
1o  Should there be
any
restriction in
proving
tax and labor
compliance status,
a period
of five
business days shall be granted,
running from the
moment
in
which
the bidder
is declared
winner
of
the
process,
extendable
for an equal period,
at the discretion of the public
administration,
for regularizing the documentation,
for
paying
or settling
in installments
the debt
and for
issuing
any
negative certificates
or positive certificates with
the effect
of a negative
certificate.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

 § 2o
Failure to regularize the documentation within the period provided for in § 1o
of this article shall entail forfeiture of the right to contract, without prejudice to the
sanctions provided for in art. 81 of Law No.
8,666, of June 21, 1993, the Administration being permitted to summon
the remaining bidders, in order of ranking, for signing of the
contract, or to revoke the bidding process.

Art. 44.  In bidding processes,
preference in contracting for microenterprises and small businesses
shall be ensured as a tie-breaking criterion.
(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021

 § 1o
A tie shall be understood as those situations in which the proposals submitted by
microenterprises and small businesses are equal to or up to 10% (ten percent)
higher than the best-ranked proposal.

 § 2o  In the
pregão modality, the percentage range established in § 1o
of this article shall be up to 5% (five percent) higher than the best price.

Art. 45. For
purposes of the provisions of art. 44 of this Complementary Law, where a tie occurs,
the following procedure shall be followed:

(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021

I - the best-ranked
microenterprise or small business may submit a price proposal
lower than that considered the winner of the process, in which case the object put out for bid
shall be awarded in its favor;

II - if
contracting of the microenterprise or small business does not occur, in the manner of item I
of the caput of this article, the remaining businesses that fall
within the hypothesis of §§ 1o and 2o of
art. 44 of this Complementary Law shall be summoned, in order of ranking, to exercise the
same right;

III - in the case
of equivalence of the values submitted by microenterprises and small
businesses that fall within the ranges established in §§ 1o
and 2o of art. 44 of this Complementary Law, a drawing shall be held
among them to determine which one may first submit the best
offer.

 § 1o  In the
event of non-contracting under the terms provided for in the caput of this article, the
object put out for bid shall be awarded in favor of the originally winning proposal of the
process.

 § 2o  The
provisions of this article shall only apply when the best initial offer was
not submitted by a microenterprise or small business.

 § 3o  In the
case of pregão, the best-ranked microenterprise or small business
shall be summoned to submit a new proposal within a maximum period of 5 (five)
minutes after the closing of bids, under penalty of preclusion.

Art. 46.  The microenterprise and
the small business holding credit rights arising from
commitments settled by bodies and entities of the União, States, Federal District and
Municipality, not paid within 30 (thirty) days from the date of settlement
may issue a cédula de crédito microempresarial.
(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021

Sole paragraph.  The cédula
de crédito microempresarial is a credit instrument governed, subsidiarily, by the
legislation provided for commercial credit instruments, backed by the
public authority's commitment, with the Executive Branch responsible for its regulation within a period
of 180 (one hundred and eighty) days from the publication of this Complementary Law.
(Repealed by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 47.  In public
contracting by the União, the States and the Municipalities, differentiated and simplified
treatment may be granted to microenterprises and small businesses
with the aim of promoting economic and social development at the municipal
and regional level, expanding the efficiency of public policies, and encouraging
technological innovation, provided this is set forth and regulated in the legislation of
the respective entity.

		Art. 47.
		 In public contracting by the direct and indirect administration,
		autarchic and foundational, federal, state and municipal, differentiated and simplified
		treatment must be granted to microenterprises and
		small businesses with the aim of promoting economic
		and social development at the municipal and regional level, expanding the
		efficiency of public policies, and encouraging technological innovation.
		(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		(See Law No.
		14,133, of 2021

		Sole paragraph.  With respect to public
		procurement, until state, municipal legislation or
		specific regulation of each body more favorable to microenterprises and
		small businesses comes into being, federal legislation shall apply.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

Art. 48.  For
compliance with the provisions of art. 47 of this Complementary Law, the public
administration may conduct a bidding process:

Art. 48.
		 For compliance with the provisions of art. 47 of this Complementary Law, the
		public administration:
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		(See Law No.
		14,133, of 2021

I - intended
exclusively for the participation of microenterprises and small businesses in
contracts whose value is up to R$ 80,000.00 (eighty thousand reais);

I - must
		conduct a bidding process intended exclusively for the participation of
		microenterprises and small businesses in the contract items whose
		value is up to R$ 80,000.00 (eighty thousand reais);
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

II - in which
bidders are required to subcontract a microenterprise or small business,
provided that the maximum percentage of the object to be subcontracted does not exceed 30%
(thirty percent) of the total put out for bid;

		II - may, in relation to bidding processes intended for the
		acquisition of works and services, require bidders to subcontract a
		microenterprise or small business;
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, de 2014)

III - in which
a quota of up to 25% (twenty-five percent) of the object is established for the contracting of
microenterprises and small businesses, in processes for the acquisition of goods
and services of a divisible nature.

		III -
		must establish, in processes for the acquisition of goods of a
		divisible nature, a quota of up to 25% (twenty-five percent) of the object for the
		contracting of microenterprises and small businesses.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

 § 1o  The
value put out for bid under the provisions of this article may not exceed 25% (twenty-five
percent) of the total put out for bid in each calendar year.

		§ 1o
		 (Repealed).
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

 § 2o  In the
case of item II of the caput of this article, the commitments and payments of the
public administration body or entity may be directed directly to
microenterprises and small businesses that have been subcontracted.

§ 3o
		 The benefits referred to in the caput of this article may,
justifiably, establish priority in contracting for microenterprises
and small businesses locally or regionally headquartered, up to a limit of 10%
(ten percent) of the best valid price.
(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 49. The provisions of
arts. 47 and 48 of this Complementary Law do not apply when:

(See Law No. 14,133, of
2021

I - the criteria
for differentiated and simplified treatment for microenterprises and small
businesses are not expressly set forth in the call notice;

		I -
		(Repealed);
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Effects to take place)

II - there is not
a minimum of 3 (three) competitive suppliers classified as microenterprises or
small businesses, locally or regionally headquartered and capable of meeting
the requirements set forth in the call notice;

III - differentiated
and simplified treatment for microenterprises and small businesses
is not advantageous for the public administration or represents harm to the
whole or complex of the object to be contracted;

IV - the bidding
process is exempt or not required, under the terms of

arts. 24 and

25 of Law No. 8,666, of June 21,
1993.

		IV - the
		bidding process is exempt or not required, under the terms of
 arts. 24 and 25 of
		Law No. 8,666, of June 21, 1993,
except for the exemptions dealt with in items I and II of art. 24 of the same
Law, in which the purchase must be made preferentially from microenterprises and
small businesses, applying the provisions of item I of art. 48.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		Section II

		 (Text
		given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

		Access to
		the Foreign Market

		Art.
		49-A.  The microenterprise and the small business benefiting from
		SIMPLES shall enjoy an export regime that shall include
		simplified procedures for qualification, licensing, customs clearance and
		foreign exchange, in the manner set forth in the regulation.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		Sole
		paragraph.  Legal entities providing international logistics
		services, when contracted by beneficiaries of SIMPLES, are
		authorized to carry out activities relating to administrative
		licensing, customs clearance, cargo consolidation and
		deconsolidation, as well as the contracting of insurance, foreign exchange, transport and
		storage of goods that are the subject of the service provided, in the manner set forth in
		the regulation.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

Sole
paragraph.  Legal
entities
providing
international
logistics services,
when contracted
by the
businesses
described in this
Complementary Law,
are authorized
to carry out
activities relating
to administrative
licensing,
customs clearance,
consolidation
and deconsolidation
of cargo
and to
contract
insurance,
foreign exchange,
transport and storage
of goods, the subject
of the service provided,
in a
simplified
manner
and
by
electronic
means, in the
manner
of the regulation.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

Art.
		49-B.
		 (VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

CHAPTER VI

OF THE
SIMPLIFICATION OF LABOR RELATIONS

Section I

Of Occupational Safety and
Medicine

Art. 50.  Microenterprises
and small businesses shall be encouraged by the public authorities and by the
Serviços Sociais Autônomos to form consortiums for access to specialized
services in occupational safety and medicine.

Section II

Of Labor
Obligations

Art. 51.  Microenterprises
and small businesses are exempted from:

I - posting a Work
Schedule Board on their premises;

II - recording
employees' vacations in the respective registration books or records;

III - employing and
enrolling their apprentices in courses of the Serviços Nacionais de Aprendizagem;

IV - keeping the book
titled Inspeção do Trabalho; and

V - notifying the
Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego of the granting of collective vacations.

Art. 52.  The provisions of

art. 51 of this Complementary Law do not exempt microenterprises and small
businesses from the following procedures:

I - entries in the
Carteira de Trabalho e Previdência Social - CTPS;

II - retention of
documents evidencing compliance with labor and social security obligations,
for as long as those obligations have not lapsed;

III - submission of the Guia
de Recolhimento do Fundo de Garantia do Tempo de Serviço e Informações à
Previdência Social - GFIP;

IV - submission of the Relações
Anuais de Empregados and the Relação Anual de Informações Sociais - RAIS and
the Cadastro Geral de Empregados e Desempregados - CAGED.

Sole paragraph.
(VETOED).

Art. 53.  (REPEALED)

Section III

Of Access to Labor
Courts

Art. 54.  It is permitted for the
employer of a microenterprise or small business to be replaced or
represented before the Labor Courts by third parties familiar with the facts,
even if they have no employment or corporate relationship.

CHAPTER VII

OF
ADVISORY-ORIENTED INSPECTION

Art. 55.  Inspection,
with respect to labor, metrological, sanitary, environmental and safety
aspects, of microenterprises and small businesses shall preferably be
advisory in nature, when the activity or situation, by its nature,
involves a degree of risk compatible with such a procedure.

Art. 55.
		 Inspection, with respect to labor, metrological,
		sanitary, environmental, safety, and land use and occupancy
		aspects, of microenterprises and small businesses shall preferably be
		advisory in nature, when the activity or situation, by its
		nature, involves a degree of risk compatible with such a procedure.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 55.
Inspection,
with respect
to
labor,
metrological,
sanitary, environmental,
safety,
consumer relations,
and land
use and occupancy
aspects of microenterprises
and
of small
businesses,
shall
preferably
be
advisory
in nature
when the
activity
or
situation, by
its nature, involves
a degree
of risk
compatible
with
such a
procedure.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

 § 1o
The double-visit criterion shall be observed for the issuance of infraction notices,
except when an infraction is found for failure to register an employee or
make an entry in the Carteira de Trabalho e Previdência Social - CTPS, or, further, in the
event of recidivism, fraud, resistance or obstruction of inspection.

 § 2o
(VETOED).

 § 3o  The
competent bodies and entities shall define, within 12 (twelve) months, the activities and
situations whose degree of risk is considered high, which shall not be subject
to the provisions of this article.

 § 4o  The
provisions of this article do not apply to the tax administrative proceeding relating to
taxes, which shall be governed by
arts. 39 and 40 of this Complementary Law.

		§ 5o
		 The provisions of § 1o apply to the issuance of a fine
		for failure to comply with ancillary obligations relating to the matters of the
		caput, including where their fulfillment is provided for in a unified
		manner together with a matter of another nature, except labor matters.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 6o
		 Failure to observe the double-visit criterion shall render null the infraction
		notice issued without compliance with the provisions of this article,
		regardless of the principal or ancillary nature of the obligation.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 7o
		 Federal, state, district and municipal public administration bodies and
		entities shall observe the principle of differentiated,
		simplified and favored treatment when setting
		amounts arising from fines and other administrative sanctions.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 8o
		 Failure to observe the provisions of the caput of this article shall constitute
		an infringement of the legal rights and guarantees assured to the
		professional exercise of business activity.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		§ 9o
		 The provisions of the caput of this article do not apply to infractions
		relating to the irregular occupation of a non-buildable strip reserve, of
		an area intended for urban facilities, of permanent preservation
		areas and of public domain strips of highways, railways and
		pipelines or of public roads and thoroughfares.
		(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

CHAPTER VIII

OF
ASSOCIATIONISM

Sole Section

Of the Sociedade de
Propósito Específico formed by Microenterprises and Small Businesses
opting for Simples Nacional

Art. 56.  Microenterprises
or small businesses opting for Simples Nacional may carry out
transactions for the purchase and sale of goods, for national and international markets,
through a sociedade de propósito específico under the terms and conditions
established by the federal Executive Branch.

Art. 56.
		 Microenterprises or small businesses may carry out
		transactions for the purchase and sale of goods and services for national
		and international markets, through a sociedade de propósito específico, under the
		terms and conditions established by the federal Executive Branch.
(Text given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

 § 1º  Legal
entities not opting for Simples Nacional may not join the
company referred to in the caput of this article.

 § 2º  The sociedade
de propósito específico referred to in this article:

I - shall have its acts
recorded with the Registro Público de Empresas Mercantis;

II - shall have as its purpose
carrying out:

a) purchase
transactions for resale to microenterprises or small businesses that are its
members;

b) transactions for the sale of
goods acquired from microenterprises and small businesses that are its
members, to legal entities that are not its members;

III - may engage in
activities to promote the goods referred to in item b of item II of this
paragraph;

IV - shall assess corporate
income tax on the actual profit basis, and shall keep
the Diário and Razão books;

V - shall assess Cofins and
Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep on a non-cumulative basis;

VI - shall export,
exclusively, goods sent to it by microenterprises and small
businesses that are members of it;

VII - shall be formed
as a limited liability company (sociedade limitada);

VIII - must, in
resales to microenterprises or small businesses that are its members,
observe a price no lower than that of the acquisitions made for resale; and

IX - must, in resales
of goods acquired from microenterprises or small businesses that are its
members, observe a price no lower than that of the acquisitions of those goods.

 § 3º  The acquisition
of goods intended for export by the sociedade de propósito específico does not give
rise to a right to credits relating to taxes or contributions covered by Simples
Nacional.

 § 4º  A
microenterprise or small business may not simultaneously participate
in more than one sociedade de propósito específico referred to in this article.

 § 5º  The sociedade
de propósito específico referred to in this article may not:

I - be a branch,
subsidiary, agency or representation, in the country, of a legal entity headquartered abroad;

II - be formed as a
cooperative, including a consumer cooperative;

III - hold an interest
in the capital of another legal entity;

IV - engage in the
activity of a commercial bank, an investment and development bank, a savings
bank, a credit, financing and investment company, or a real estate credit company, of a
brokerage or dealer of securities and foreign exchange, of a leasing
company, of private insurance and capitalization, or of
supplementary pension plans;

V - be a result of or
remaining from a spin-off or any other form of dismembering of a legal
entity that occurred in one of the 5 (five) preceding calendar years;

VI - engage in an
activity prohibited to microenterprises and small businesses opting for Simples
Nacional.

 § 6º  Failure to
observe the provisions of § 4º of this article shall entail joint and several
liability of the microenterprises or small businesses that are members
of the sociedade de propósito específico referred to in this article, in cases where
its holders, members or administrators knew or should have known of such
failure.

 § 7º  The Executive
Branch shall regulate the provisions of this article by December 31, 2008.

§
		8º  (VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
		Effects to take place

CHAPTER IX

OF
CREDIT AND CAPITALIZATION INCENTIVES

Section I

General Provisions

Art. 57.  The federal
Executive Branch shall propose, whenever necessary, measures aimed at improving
microenterprises' and small businesses' access to credit and
capital markets, aiming to reduce transaction costs, increase
allocative efficiency, encourage a competitive environment, and improve the
quality of the pool of information, in particular access to and portability of
credit registration information.

Art. 58.  Public
commercial banks and public multiple-service banks with a commercial portfolio, and the
Caixa Econômica Federal, shall maintain specific credit lines for
microenterprises and small businesses, with the amount available
and its access conditions to be expressed in the respective budgets and widely
disclosed.

Art. 58.
Public
commercial
banks and
public
multiple-service
banks with a commercial portfolio,
the Caixa Econômica Federal and the Banco Nacional do Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social - BNDES
shall maintain
specific credit
lines
for
microenterprises
and for
small businesses
, linked to social
reciprocity,
with
the amount available
and its
access conditions
to be expressed
in the respective
budgets
and
widely
disclosed.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

 Sole paragraph.  The
institutions mentioned in the caput of this article shall publish,
together with their respective financial statements, a detailed report on the resources
allocated to the credit lines referred to in the caput of this article and those
actually used, mandatorily stating the justifications for the
performance achieved.

§
1o  The
institutions
mentioned
in the caput
of this article
shall publish, together with
their respective
financial statements, a detailed
report
of the resources
allocated
to the credit lines
referred to
in the caput and those
actually
used,
mandatorily
stating the justifications
for the performance
achieved.

(Text given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§ 2o
		 Access to the specific credit lines provided for in the caput
		of this article shall be treated in a simplified and agile manner, with
wide disclosure of the respective conditions and requirements.
(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 3o
(VETOED).

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
4o  The
Conselho
Monetário
Nacional
- CMN
shall regulate the minimum percentage
of allocation
of the resources referred to
in the caput,
including with respect to
the resources
referred to
in
item
b of item
III of art. 10 of Law No.
4,595, of
December
31,
1964.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		Art. 58-A.  Public and private banks may not count,
		for the purposes of meeting targets, loans made to individuals,
		even if partners of companies, as the provision of credit for
microenterprises and small businesses.
(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 59.  The institutions
referred to in the caput of art. 58 of this Complementary Law must coordinate
with the respective support and representation entities for microenterprises and
small businesses, in order to provide and develop training
programs, managerial development and technological capacity-building.

Art. 60.  (VETOED).

Art. 60-A.
A Sistema Nacional de Garantias de Crédito may be
established by the Executive Branch, with the
aim of facilitating microenterprises' and small businesses' access to
credit and other services of financial institutions, which, in the manner set forth in the
regulation, shall provide them with differentiated, favored and
simplified treatment, without prejudice to serving other target audiences.

Sole paragraph.  The
Sistema Nacional de Garantias de Crédito shall form part of the Sistema Financeiro
Nacional.

		Art. 60-B.  Credit-risk guarantee funds for businesses that
		have participation of the União in the composition of their capital shall serve,
		whenever possible, credit transactions involving microenterprises
		and small businesses, defined in the manner of art. 3o
		of this Law.
(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art.
		60-C.  (VETOED).
(Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 61.  For purposes of
credit support for foreign trade transactions of microenterprises and small
businesses, the classification parameters or other
highly significant instruments for exporting microenterprises and small
businesses, according to business size, approved by the Mercado
Comum do Sul - MERCOSUL, shall be used.

Art. 61-A.  In order
to encourage
innovation
activities and
the productive
investments,
a company classified as a
microenterprise
or small
business,
under the
terms
of this Complementary
Law,
may allow
the contribution of
capital,
which shall not
be included in the
share
capital
of the company.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
1o  The
purposes of
fostering
innovation
and productive
investments must
appear
in the
participation agreement,
with a term
not exceeding
seven
years.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
2o  The
capital
contribution
may be made
by an individual
or by a
legal
entity,
referred to as
an angel investor.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		§ 2º The capital contribution may be made by an individual, by a
		legal entity, or by investment funds, in accordance with a regulation of the
		Comissão de Valores Mobiliários, which shall be referred to as
		angel investors.

		(Text given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)     Effective

§
3o  The
activity
constituting the
corporate
purpose
is carried out
solely by
regular members,
in their
own
name
and under
their exclusive
responsibility.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
4o  The
angel investor:

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

I
- shall not
be
considered
a member nor
shall have any
right
to management
or vote
in the administration
of the
company;     (Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		I - shall not be considered a member nor shall have any right to management or
		vote in the administration of the company, without prejudice to the possibility of
		participation in deliberations in a strictly consultative capacity,
		in accordance with the contractual arrangement;

		(Text given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)     Effective

II
- shall not
be liable for
any debt
of the
company,
including
in judicial reorganization,
not
applying to it
being
art. 50
of
Law
No. 10,406, of
January
10,
2002
- Código Civil;

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

III
- shall be
remunerated
for
its contributions,
under the
terms
of the participation
agreement, for a
maximum
term
of five
years.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		III - shall be remunerated for its contributions, under the terms of the
		participation agreement, for a maximum term of 7 (seven) years;

		(Added by Complementary Law No. 182, of
		2021)     Effective

		IV - may require the administrators to provide justified accounts of their
		administration and, annually, the inventory, the balance sheet and the
		statement of economic results; and

		(Added by Complementary Law No. 182, of
		2021)
		Effective

		V - may examine, at any time, the books, the documents and the
		state of the cash and portfolio of the company, except where there is a contractual
		arrangement setting a specific time for this.

		(Added by Complementary Law No. 182, of
		2021)     Effective

§
5o  For
purposes
of
classifying the
company as a
microenterprise
or small
business, the
amounts of
contributed capital
are not
considered
revenue
of the
company.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
6o  At the
end
of each
period, the
angel investor
shall be
entitled to remuneration
corresponding
to the
results
distributed,
in accordance with the participation agreement,
not exceeding
50% (fifty
percent)
of the profits of the company
classified
as a microenterprise
or small
business.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		§ 6º The contracting parties may:

		(Text given by Complementary Law No. 182,
		of 2021)     Effective

		I - stipulate periodic remuneration, at the end of each period, for the
		angel investor, in accordance with the participation agreement; or

		(Added by Complementary Law No. 182, of
		2021)     Effective

		II - provide for the possibility of converting the capital contribution into
		an equity interest.

		(Added by Complementary Law No. 182, of
		2021)     Effective

§
7o  The
angel investor may
only exercise
the right
of redemption after
at least,
two
years
have elapsed
from the capital
contribution,
or a longer term
established
in the
participation
agreement, and
its holdings
shall be paid
in the
manner
of
art.
1,031
of Law
No. 10,406, of 10
January
2002
- Código
Civil, not
being permitted
to exceed
the invested
amount duly
adjusted.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

		§ 7º The angel investor may only exercise the right of redemption
		after, at least, 2 (two) years have elapsed from the capital contribution, or
		a longer term established in the participation agreement, and its holdings
		shall be paid in the manner provided for in art. 1,031 of Law No. 10,406, of 10
		January 2002 (Código Civil), not being permitted to exceed the
		invested amount duly adjusted by an index provided for in the agreement.

		(Text given by Complementary Law No. 182,
		of 2021)     Effective

§
8o  The
provisions
of §
7o
of this article
do not
prevent
the transfer
of ownership of the
contribution
to
third parties.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
9o  The
transfer
of ownership of the contribution
to a third party
unrelated to the company
shall depend
on the
consent
of the
members,
except by express
contractual
stipulation to the
contrary.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place

§
10.  The
Ministério
da Fazenda
may
regulate
taxation on the withdrawal
of the invested
capital.

(Added by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effects to take place
Art. 61-B.  The
issuance
and the
ownership
of special contributions
do not prevent
the
enjoyment
of the
Simples
Nacional.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

Effectiveness

Art.
61-C.
 Should the partners
decide
to sell
the company,
the angel investor shall have the right
of preference
in the
acquisition, as well as the right
of
joint sale
of the ownership
of the capital contribution,
under the
same
terms
and conditions
that are
offered to the regular
partners.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

Effectiveness

Art.
 61-D.
 Investment
funds
may contribute capital as
angel investors
in
microenterprises
and small
businesses.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

Effectiveness

		Art. 61-D. Investment funds may contribute capital as
		angel investors in microenterprises and in small businesses,
		pursuant to regulation by the Comissão de Valores Mobiliários (Securities and Exchange Commission).

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)     In force

		Section I-A

		Of the Mutual Guarantee Society and the
	Counter-Guarantee Society

		(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Art. 61-E. The
	incorporation of a mutual guarantee society (SGS), in the
	form of a joint-stock company, is authorized, for the
	granting of guarantees to its participating members.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 1 (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 2 (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 3 The acts
	of the mutual guarantee society shall be filed with the Public Registry of
	Business Enterprises and Related Activities.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 4 The
	trading, among participating members, of their shares in the respective
	mutual guarantee society is free, subject to the maximum participation that each
	member may attain.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 5 Small
	entrepreneurs, microentrepreneurs and micro-entrepreneurs and legal entities
	incorporated by such associates may be admitted as participating
	members.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 6 (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

§ 7 Without
	prejudice to the provisions of this Complementary Law, the provisions of the
	law governing joint-stock companies apply to the mutual guarantee society.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Art. 61-F. The mutual guarantee contract shall have the purpose of regulating the granting
	of the guarantee by the society to the participating member, upon the receipt of a
	remuneration fee for the service provided, and shall set forth the clauses
	necessary for compliance with the obligations of the beneficiary member towards the
	society.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Sole
	paragraph. In order to grant the guarantee, the mutual guarantee society
	may require a counter-guarantee from the participating beneficiary member,
	subject to the principles that govern the existence of that type of
	society.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Art. 61-G. The mutual guarantee society may grant guarantees over the
	amount of receivables of its participating members that are subject to
	securitization.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Art. 61-H. The incorporation of a counter-guarantee society, whose
	purpose is to offer counter-guarantees to the mutual guarantee
	society, under terms to be defined by regulation, is authorized.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Art. 61-I. The mutual guarantee society and the counter-guarantee society
	shall be part of the National Financial System and shall have their incorporation,
	organization and operation governed by the National Monetary Council,
	subject to the provisions of this Complementary Law.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 169, of 2019)

Section II

Of the Responsibilities
of the Central Bank of Brazil

Art. 62.  The Central Bank
of Brazil may make data and information available to the financial
institutions that are part of the National Financial System, including through the
Credit Information System - SCR, aiming to expand access to credit
for microenterprises and small businesses and to foster banking competition.

Art. 62.
		 The Central Bank of Brazil shall make available data and information from the
		financial institutions that are part of the National Financial System,
		including through the Credit Information System - SCR, so as to
		expand access to credit for microenterprises and small
		businesses and foster banking competition.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 1  The
provisions of the caput of this article cover the making available of specific data and
information relating to the history of the banking and
credit relationship of microenterprises and small businesses, only to the
holders themselves.

§ 2  The
Central Bank of Brazil may guarantee simplified, favored and
differentiated access to the data and information referred to in § 1 of this
article to their respective interested parties, and the institution may choose to
provide it through the financial institutions with which the client
itself has a relationship.

Section III

Of the Conditions of Access
to the Special Deposits of the Workers' Assistance Fund  FAT

Art. 63.  CODEFAT may
make financial resources available through the creation of a specific program
for credit cooperatives whose membership includes
micro-entrepreneurs, microenterprise entrepreneurs and small business entrepreneurs,
as well as their companies.

Sole paragraph.  The
resources referred to in the caput of this article shall be allocated
exclusively to microenterprises and small businesses.

 Section IV

(VETOED)

 (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

CHAPTER X

OF THE
STIMULUS TO INNOVATION

Section I

General Provisions

Art. 64.  For the purposes
of this Complementary Law, the following shall be considered:

I - innovation: the conception
of a new product or manufacturing process, as well as the addition of new
functionalities or characteristics to a product or process that entails incremental
improvements and an effective gain in quality or productivity, resulting in greater
competitiveness in the market;

II - development agency:
a public or private body or institution that has among its
objectives the financing of actions aimed at stimulating and promoting the
development of science, technology and innovation;

III - Scientific and
Technological Institution - ICT: a body or entity of the public administration whose
institutional mission includes, among others, carrying out basic or applied
scientific or technological research activities;

IV - technological innovation
nucleus: a nucleus or body established by one or more ICTs for the
purpose of managing its innovation policy;

V - support institution:
institutions created under the auspices of Law No. 8,958, of 20 December
1994, for the purpose of providing support to research, teaching and
extension projects and to institutional, scientific and technological development.

	VI - technological support instruments for innovation:
any service made available in person or on the internet that provides
access to information, guidance, databases of information solutions,
technical answers, research and complementary support activities carried out
by the institutions provided for in items II to V of this article.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Section II

Of Support for Innovation

Section II

	(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

Of Support for Innovation and of the
	Inova Simples of the Empresa Simples de Inovação

Art. 65.  The Union, the
States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, and the respective development
agencies, the ICTs, the technological innovation nuclei and the support
institutions shall maintain specific programs for microenterprises and
small businesses, including when these are structured as incubators,
observing the following:

I - access conditions
shall be differentiated, favored and simplified;

II - the amount available
and its access conditions must be expressed in the respective budgets and
widely disclosed.

§ 1  The
institutions shall publish, together with their respective accountability
reports, a detailed report on the strategies for maximizing the
participation of the segment, as well as the resources allocated to the actions referred to in
the caput of this article and those actually used, necessarily including
the justifications for the performance achieved during the period.

§ 2  The
legal entities referred to in the caput of this article shall have as a target the
application of at least 20% (twenty percent) of the resources allocated to
innovation to the development of such activity in microenterprises or in
small businesses.

§ 3  The
bodies and entities of the federal public administration engaged in
research, development or technological capacity-building shall have as a target the effective
application, at the minimum percentage set out in § 2 of this
article, of programs and projects supporting microenterprises or
small businesses, transmitting to the Ministry of Science and Technology, in the first
quarter of each year, information on the amounts allocated and the respective
percentage ratio in relation to the total resources allocated for that purpose.

		§ 3
		 The bodies and entities of the federal, state and municipal
		public administration engaged in research, development or
		technological capacity-building shall have as a target the effective application, at the
		minimum percentage set out in this article, of programs and projects supporting
		microenterprises or small businesses, transmitting to the
		Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, in the first quarter of
		each year, information on the amounts allocated and the respective
		percentage ratio in relation to the total resources allocated for that
		purpose.
(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

§ 4  The rates of the taxes and contributions
listed below, levied on the acquisition, or importation, of equipment,
machines, apparatus, instruments, accessories, spare parts and tools that
accompany them, in the manner set forth in regulation, when acquired, or
imported, directly by microenterprises or small businesses for
incorporation into their fixed assets, are hereby authorized to be reduced to 0 (zero):

I - the Union, with respect to
the IPI, the Cofins, the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep, the Cofins-Importação and the
Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep-Importação; and

II - the States and the
Federal District, with respect to the ICMS.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Production of effects

§ 5  A
microenterprise or small business that acquires goods with the benefit
provided for in § 4 of this article shall be obligated, in the cases provided for in
regulation, to pay the taxes and contributions that were not paid,
plus interest and penalties, whether for late payment or ex officio, counted from the date of
acquisition, in the domestic market, or of the registration of the import declaration - DI,
calculated in accordance with the legislation governing the collection of the unpaid tax.

§ 6
		 For purposes of executing the budget provided for in this article, the bodies
		and institutions may allocate resources earmarked for the creation and
		funding of innovation environments, including incubators, technological parks and
		vocational centers, metrology, testing,
research or training-support laboratories, as well as funding of extension
scholarships and remuneration of professors, researchers and agents involved in
complementary technological support activities.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 65-A. The Inova Simples is hereby created, a simplified special regime that
	grants incremental or disruptive business initiatives that
	self-declare as startups or innovation companies differentiated
	treatment with a view to stimulating their creation, formalization,
	development and consolidation as agents driving technological
	advances and the generation of employment and income.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		Art. 65-A. The Inova Simples is hereby created, a simplified special regime
		that grants incremental or disruptive business initiatives that self-declare as innovation companies differentiated
		treatment with a view to stimulating their creation, formalization,
		development and consolidation as agents driving technological
		advances and the generation of employment and income.

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)In force

§ 1 For the purposes of this Complementary Law, a startup is considered to be a
	company of an innovative nature that seeks to improve systems, methods or
	business, production, service or product models, which,
	when already existing, characterize startups of an incremental
	nature, or, when related to the creation of something entirely new, characterize startups of a disruptive nature.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		§ 1 (Revoked).

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)     In force

§ 2 Startups are characterized by developing their innovations under
	conditions of uncertainty that require constant experiments and validations,
	including through provisional experimental commercialization, before
	proceeding to full commercialization and the obtaining of revenue.       (Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		§ 2 (Revoked).

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
		of 2021)    In force

§ 3 The differentiated treatment referred to in the caput of this article
	consists of establishing a summary procedure for the opening and closing of companies
	under the Inova Simples regime, which shall take place in a simplified and
	automatic manner, in the same digital environment of the portal of the Rede Nacional para a
	Simplificação do Registro e da Legalização de Empresas e Negócios (Redesim),
	on an official federal government website, through the use of a
	dedicated digital form, available in a window or icon called Inova
	Simples.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 4 The holders of a company subject to the Inova Simples regime
	shall fill out a basic registration form with the following information:
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

I - civil qualification, domicile and CPF;
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

II - description of the scope of the innovative business intent and definition of the
	corporate name, which must necessarily contain the expression Inova Simples
	(I.S.);
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		II - description of the scope of the innovative business intent, using
		innovative business models for the generation of products or services, and
		definition of the business name, which shall contain the expression Inova Simples
		(I.S.);

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)     In force

III - self-declaration, under penalty of law, that the operation of the company
	subject to the Inova Simples regime will not produce pollution, noise or
	vehicle traffic congestion, for purposes of characterizing it as low risk, under the
	terms of § 4 of art. 6 of this Complementary Law;
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

IV - definition of the location of the headquarters, which may be commercial, residential or of
	mixed use, whenever not prohibited by municipal or Federal District legislation,
	including the possibility of its installation in places where technology
	parks, educational institutions, junior enterprises,
	incubators, accelerators and shared coworking spaces
	operate; and
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

V - optionally, the existence of support or validation from a
	public or private technical, scientific or academic institute, as well as from
	incubators, accelerators and educational institutions, in technology parks
	and the like.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 5 Once the information has been correctly filled out, a
	specific CNPJ number shall be automatically generated, in the name of the Inova Simples
	company's designation, under a dedicated Inova Simples code.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 6 The company subject to the Inova Simples regime incorporated in the manner
	provided for in this article must immediately open a legal-entity bank account
	for purposes of raising and paying in capital, arising from a contribution by
	its own holders or by an investor domiciled abroad, from a public or private
	credit line and from other sources provided for by law.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 7 On the Redesim portal, in the space intended for entering data on
	Inova Simples, a field or icon shall be created for automatic communication
	to the Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (INPI) of the inventive content
	of the scope of the business initiative, if any, for purposes of trademark and
	patent registration, without prejudice to the holder directly and on its own
	initiative arranging for the intellectual and industrial property registrations with the INPI.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		§ 7 On the Redesim portal, in the space intended for entering data
		on Inova Simples, an icon shall be made available that will direct to the virtual
		environment of the Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (INPI), which
		will contain guidance for filing a patent application or
		trademark registration.

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)    In force

§ 8 The INPI must create a mechanism linking, from the receipt of data
	through to the summary processing of trademark and patent applications of
	Inova Simples companies.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		§ 8 The examination of patent applications or trademark registration
		requests, under the terms of this article, filed by companies participating in
		Inova Simples, shall be conducted on a priority basis.

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
of 2021)      In force

§ 9 Capitalized resources shall not constitute income and shall be allocated
	exclusively to funding the development of startup projects
	referred to in § 1 of this article.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

		§ 9 (Revoked).

		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 182,
		of 2021)     In force

§ 10. Experimental commercialization of the service or product is permitted up to the
	limit set for the MEI in this Complementary Law.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 11. Should the development of the intended scope not succeed,
	the deregistration of the CNPJ shall be automatic, through a self-declaration
	procedure on the Redesim portal.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 12. (VETOED).
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

§ 13. The provisions of this article shall be regulated by the Comitê Gestor do
	Simples Nacional.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 167, of 2019)

Art. 66.  In the first
quarter of the following year, the bodies and entities referred to in

art.
67 of this Complementary Law shall transmit to the Ministry of Science and Technology a detailed
report on the projects carried out, including analysis of the performance
achieved.

Art. 67.  Bodies of the
same kind as the Ministry of Science and Technology at the state and municipal levels shall
prepare and disclose an annual report indicating the amount of resources received,
including by transfer from third parties, that were applied directly or through
affiliated organizations, by Sectoral Funds and others, in the segment of
microenterprises and small businesses, describing and evaluating the results
obtained and indicating the planned actions and targets for expanding their
participation in the following fiscal year.

 Section
III

Of
Support for
Certification

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effectiveness

Art. 67-A.  The
competent body
of the Executive
Branch
shall make available
on the internet
information
on quality
certification of
products and processes
for microenterprises
and
small
businesses.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effectiveness

Sole
paragraph.  The
bodies
of the direct
and indirect
administration and
the private
certifying entities, responsible for the
creation, regulation
and management of quality
certification processes
for products
and processes, must,
whenever
requested,
make available to
the competent body
of the Executive Branch
information
regarding procedures
and standards
applicable
to the certification
processes
within their
scope of
operation.

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effectiveness

CHAPTER XI

OF CIVIL AND
BUSINESS RULES

Section I

Of Civil Rules

Subsection I

Of the Small Business Owner

Art. 68.
For purposes of applying the provisions of
 arts.
970 and 1,179 of Law No. 10,406, of
10 January 2002
(Civil Code), a small business owner shall be considered to be the individual entrepreneur
characterized as a microenterprise under this Complementary Law who earns annual gross
revenue up to the limit provided for in
§
1 of art. 18-A.

Subsection II

(VETOED).

Art. 69.  (VETOED).

Section II

Of Corporate
Resolutions and Organizational Structure

Art. 70.  Microenterprises
and small businesses are exempted from holding meetings and
assemblies in any of the situations provided for in civil legislation, which shall
be replaced by a resolution representative of the first whole number
greater than half of the share capital.

§ 1  The
provisions of the caput of this article do not apply where there is a
contractual provision to the contrary, where there is a case of just cause giving rise to the
exclusion of a partner, or where one or more partners jeopardize the continuity of
the company due to acts of undeniable gravity.

§ 2
In the cases referred to in § 1 of this article, a
meeting or assembly shall be held in accordance with civil legislation.

Art. 71.  Business owners and
the companies covered by this Complementary Law, under the terms of civil
legislation, are exempted from publishing any corporate act.

Section III

Of the Business Name

Art. 72.  Microenterprises
and small businesses, under the terms of civil legislation, shall add to
their firm name or denomination the expressions Microempresa or Empresa de Pequeno
Porte, or their respective abbreviations, ME or EPP, as applicable, the inclusion
of the corporate purpose being optional.
(Revoked by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)

(In force)

Section IV

Of the Protest of Instruments

Art. 73.  The protest of an
instrument, when the debtor is a micro-entrepreneur or small business, is
subject to the following conditions:

I - no additions on account of fees, costs and
contributions to the State or Federal District, welfare fund, fund
for financing free-of-charge acts, special funds of the Court of Justice, or
of a trade association, created or that may come to be created under any title
or denomination, shall be levied on the notary's emoluments, except for the
collection from the debtor of postage, transportation and edict-publication expenses
for carrying out the notification;

II - for payment of the
instrument at the notary's office, a check drawn on a
banking establishment may not be required, but, once payment is made by means of a check,
whether drawn on a banking establishment or not, the discharge given by the protest
notary's office shall be conditional upon the actual clearing of the check;

III - cancellation of the
protest record, based on payment of the instrument, shall be made
regardless of a declaration of consent from the creditor, except in the case of
impossibility of presenting the protested original;

IV - for purposes of the
provisions of the caput and of items I, II and III of the caput of this article,
the debtor must prove its status as a microenterprise or small
business before the instrument-protest notary's office, by means of a document issued
by the Board of Trade or by the Civil Registry of Legal Entities, as
applicable;

V - when payment of the
instrument is made with a check without sufficient funds, all
benefits provided for the debtor under this article shall automatically be suspended by the
protest notary's offices, for a period of 1 (one) year, regardless of the drawing up
and registration of the respective protest.

Art.
		73-A.  Contractual clauses relating to the limitation of the
issuance or circulation of credit instruments or credit rights arising
from purchase-and-sale transactions of products and services by microenterprises and
small businesses are prohibited.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

CHAPTER XII

OF
ACCESS TO JUSTICE

Section I

Of Access to Special
Small Claims Courts

Art. 74. The provisions of § 1 of art. 8 of Law No. 9,099, of
26 September 1995,
and of item
I of the caput of art. 6 of Law No. 10,259, of 12 July
2001,
apply to microenterprises and small businesses covered by this Complementary Law,
which, like capable natural persons, may henceforth be admitted as
claimants before the Special Small Claims Court, excluding assignees of
rights of legal entities.

		Art. 74-A.  The Judiciary,
especially through the Conselho Nacional de Justiça - CNJ, and the Ministry of
Justice shall implement measures to disseminate differentiated and
favored treatment for microenterprises and small businesses within their respective
areas of competence.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Section II

Of Prior Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration

Art. 75.  Microenterprises
and small businesses shall be encouraged to use the institutes of
prior conciliation, mediation and arbitration to resolve their disputes.

§ 1
Agreements entered into within the scope of prior conciliation commissions shall
be recognized as fully valid as a matter of right.

§ 2  The
stimulus referred to in the caput of this article shall include awareness
campaigns, clarification services and differentiated, simplified and
favored treatment with respect to administrative costs and fees charged.

Section III

Of Partnerships

Art. 75-A.  In order to
meet the demands arising from the stimulus provided for in arts. 74 and 75 of this
Complementary Law, private and public entities, including the Judiciary,
may enter into partnerships with one another, aimed at the
installation or use of environments conducive to carrying out the
procedures inherent to seeking dispute
resolution.

Art.
		75-B.  (VETOED).

(Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Effectiveness

CHAPTER XIII

OF
SUPPORT AND REPRESENTATION

Art. 76. For
compliance with the provisions of this Complementary Law, as well as to develop and
monitor public policies aimed at microenterprises and small
businesses, the government, in coordination with the Fórum Permanente das Microempresas
e Empresas de Pequeno Porte, under the coordination of the Ministério do Desenvolvimento,
Indústria e Comércio Exterior, shall encourage and support the creation of forums
with the participation of the competent public bodies and entities linked to the
sector.

Sole paragraph. The
Ministério do Desenvolvimento, Indústria e Comércio Exterior shall coordinate with the
entities representing microenterprises and small businesses the
implementation of regional forums in the units of the federation.

		Art.
		76.  For compliance with the provisions of this Complementary Law, as well as
		to develop and monitor public policies aimed at
		microenterprises and small businesses, the government, in
		coordination with the Fórum Permanente das Microempresas e Empresas de
		Pequeno Porte, under the coordination of the Secretaria da Micro e Pequena
		Empresa da Presidência da República, shall encourage and support the
		creation of forums with the participation of the competent public bodies and
		entities linked to the sector.
		(Wording given
		by Law No. 12,792, of 2013)

		Sole paragraph.  The
		Secretaria da Micro e Pequena Empresa da Presidência da República
		shall coordinate with the entities representing microenterprises and small
		businesses the implementation of regional forums in the units of the
		federation.
		(Wording given
		by Law No. 12,792, of 2013)

		Art. 76-A.  Institutions representing and supporting businesses
		shall promote awareness, information,
		guidance and support, tax-education, employment-contract-regularity and
		computerized-and-electronic-systems-adoption programs, as a
		way of stimulating the formalization of ventures, businesses and
		jobs, expanding competitiveness and disseminating
		associativism among microenterprises, individual
		micro-entrepreneurs, small businesses and equivalent entities.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

CHAPTER XIV

FINAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Art. 77.  Once this
Complementary Law is enacted, the Comitê Gestor shall issue, within 30 (thirty) months, the instructions
necessary for its implementation.

§ 1  The
Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego, the Secretaria da Receita Federal, the Secretaria
da Receita Previdenciária, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities
must issue, within 1 (one) year, the laws and other acts necessary to ensure
prompt and immediate differentiated, simplified and favored legal treatment
for microenterprises and small businesses.

§ 2  The
federal, state and municipal direct and indirect administration and
parastatal entities shall agree, within the period provided for in § 1 of this
article, on the measures necessary to adapt their respective normative acts to the provisions
of this Complementary Law.

§ 3
(VETOED).

§ 4
The Comitê Gestor shall regulate the provisions of item I of § 6
of art. 13 of this Complementary Law by 31 December 2008.

§ 5
As of 1 January 2009, tax substitutions that do not comply with the
discipline established under § 4 of this article shall lose
effectiveness.

§ 6
The Committee referred to in item III of the caput of art. 2
of this Complementary Law shall issue, by 31 December 2009, the instructions
necessary regarding its competence.

Art. 78.  (REVOKED)

Art. 79.
Installment payment, in up to 100 (one hundred) monthly and successive installments, shall be
granted, for entry into the Simples
Nacional, of debts with the Instituto Nacional do Seguro Social  INSS, or with the federal, state
or municipal Treasury, owed by the microenterprise or
small business and by its holder or partner, due by 30
June 2008.

§ 1  The
minimum monthly installment amount shall be R$ 100.00 (one hundred reais), considered
separately for debts owed to the Fazenda Nacional, to Seguridade
Social, and to the Treasury of the States, Municipalities or Federal District.

§ 2
This installment plan also covers debts recorded as active debt.

§ 3  The
installment plan shall be requested from the respective Treasury to which the taxpayer
owes the debt.

§ 3-A  The
installment plan must be requested within the period established by regulation of the
Comitê Gestor.

§ 4
The other rules in force for the installment payment of federal taxes and contributions apply
to the provisions of this article, as regulated by the Comitê Gestor.

§ 5
(VETOED)

§ 6
(VETOED)

§ 7
(VETOED)

§ 8
(VETOED)

§ 9  The
installment plan referred to in the caput of this article does not apply in the case
of re-entry of a microenterprise or small business into the Simples Nacional.

Art.
79-A. (VETOED)

Art.
79-B.
Exceptionally for taxable events occurring in July
2007, the taxes assessed under arts. 18 to 20 of this Complementary Law
must be paid by the last business day of August 2007.

Art. 79-C.  A
microenterprise and a small business that, on 30 June 2007, were
classified under the regime provided for in

Law No. 9,317, of 5 December 1996,
and that did not enter the regime provided for in art. 12 of this Complementary Law
shall be subject, as of 1 July 2007, to the
tax rules applicable to other legal entities.

§ 1
For purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article, the taxpayer may
elect to pay the Imposto sobre a Renda da Pessoa Jurídica  IRPJ and the
Contribuição Social sobre o Lucro Líquido - CSLL under the actual profit method,
quarterly or annually, or under the presumed profit method.

§ 2
The election for taxation on the basis of presumed profit shall take effect through payment, when
due, of the IRPJ and CSLL owed, corresponding to the 3rd
(third) quarter of 2007 and, in the case of annual actual profit, through payment of the
IRPJ and CSLL relating to the month of July 2007 based on the monthly estimate.

Art. 79-D
Exceptionally, for taxable events occurring between 1
July 2007 and 31 December 2008, legal entities carrying out
activity simultaneously subject to the levy of IPI and ISS must pay
the ISS directly to the Municipality in which this tax is owed by the last
business day of February 2009, applying, until that date, the provisions of

 sole paragraph of art.
100 of Law No. 5,172, of 25 October 1966 - Código Tributário
Nacional - CTN.

Art. 79-E.  A
small business that has elected the Simples Nacional as of 31 December 2011
and that, during calendar year 2011, earns total annual gross revenue between R$
2,400,000.01 (two million, four hundred thousand reais and one cent) and R$
3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais) shall continue automatically
included in the Simples Nacional with effects as of 1
January 2012, subject to the right of exclusion by notice from the electing party.

Art.
 79-E.
 A
small business
electing
the Simples
Nacional as of
31
December
2017
that
during
calendar year
2017 earns
total annual gross revenue
between R$ 3,600,000.01 (three
million,
six hundred thousand reais
and one
cent)
and R$
4,800,000.00
(four
million
eight hundred
thousand
reais) shall continue
automatically
included
in the Simples
Nacional
with
effects
as of 1
January
2018,
subject to the right
of exclusion by
notice
from the electing party.

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)      Effectiveness

Art. 80. Art. 21
of Law No. 8,212, of 24 July 1991, is hereby supplemented with the
following §§ 2 and 3, with the sole
paragraph becoming § 1:

			Art. 21.
		.........................................................................

			.............................................................................................

			§ 2
		The contribution rate is 11% (eleven percent) on the value corresponding to the
		minimum monthly contribution-salary limit for the self-employed
		individual insured contributor who works on their own account, without an
		employment relationship with a company or equivalent, and for the voluntary
		insured party who elect to be excluded from the right to the length-of-contribution
		retirement benefit.

			§ 3
		The insured party who has contributed under § 2
		of this article and wishes to count the corresponding contribution time
		for purposes of obtaining length-of-contribution retirement or the
		reciprocal counting of contribution time referred to in art. 94 of
		Law No. 8,213, of 24 July 1991, must
		supplement the monthly contribution by paying an additional 9%
		(nine percent), plus the default interest referred to in the provisions
		of art. 34 of this Law. (NR)

Art. 81. Art. 45
of Law No. 8,212, of 24 July 1991, shall henceforth read as follows
with the following amendments:

			Art. 45.
		.........................................................................

			.............................................................................................

			§ 2
		To assess and constitute the credits referred to in § 1
		of this article, Seguridade Social shall use as the incidence base the
		value of the simple arithmetic mean of the highest contribution-salaries,
		adjusted, corresponding to 80% (eighty percent) of the entire
		contributory period elapsed since July 1994.

			...........................................................................................

			§ 4
		Default interest of 0.5% (zero point five percent)
		per month, capitalized annually, limited to a maximum percentage
		of 50% (fifty percent), and a penalty of 10% (ten percent), shall be
		levied on the amounts assessed under §§ 2 and 3
		of this article.

			............................................................................................

			§ 7
		The supplementary contribution referred to in § 3 of
		art. 21 of this Law shall be required at any time, under penalty of
		denial of the benefit. (NR)

Art. 82. Law No.
8,213, of 24 July 1991, shall henceforth read as follows with the following amendments:

			Art. 9
		..........................................................................

			§ 1
		The Regime Geral de Previdência Social - RGPS guarantees coverage of all
		situations set forth in art. 1 of this Law, except those
		of involuntary unemployment, subject to specific law, and of length-of-contribution
		retirement for the worker referred to in
			§ 2
		of art. 21 of Law No. 8,212, of 24 July 1991.

			......................................................................
		(NR)

			Art.............................................................................

			I -
		..................................................................................

			........................................................................................

			c)
		length-of-contribution retirement;

			.........................................................................................

			§ 3
		The self-employed individual insured contributor who works on their own account, without
		an employment relationship with a company or equivalent, and the voluntary
		insured party who contribute under § 2 of art. 21 of Law No.
		8,212, of 24 July 1991, shall not be entitled to length-of-contribution
		retirement. (NR)

			Art. 55.
		.......................................................................

			..........................................................................................

			§ 4
		The period during which the self-employed individual or voluntary insured
		contributor has contributed under § 2
		of art. 21 of Law No. 8,212, of 24 July 1991,
		shall not be counted as contribution time for purposes of granting
		the benefit covered by this subsection, unless the contributions have been supplemented under § 3
		of the same article. (NR)

Art. 83. Art. 94
of

Law No. 8,213, of 24 July 1991, is hereby supplemented with the
following § 2, with the sole paragraph becoming § 1:

			Art. 94.
		........................................................................

			..............................................................................................

			§ 2
		The period during which the self-employed individual or voluntary insured
		contributor has contributed under § 2 of art. 21 of Law No.
		8,212, of 24 July 1991, shall not be counted as contribution time for purposes of the
		benefits provided for under own social security regimes, unless the
		contributions have been supplemented under § 3 of the same article. (NR)

Art. 84. Art. 58
of the

Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho - CLT, approved by Decree-Law No.
5,452, of 1 May 1943, shall henceforth read with the following
§ 3 added:

			Art. 58.
		.......................................................................

			..............................................................................................

			§ 3
		For microenterprises and small businesses, in the case of
		transportation provided by the employer, to a place of difficult access or not served by
		public transportation, the average time spent by the employee, as well as the
		form and nature of the remuneration, may be fixed by means of a collective
		bargaining agreement or convention.

			(NR)

Art.
85. (VETOED).
Art. 85-A.  It shall be incumbent
upon the Municipal Public Power to designate a Development Agent for the implementation
of the provisions of this Complementary Law, observing local specificities.

§ 1º  The function of
Development Agent is characterized by the exercise of articulation of public
actions for the promotion of local and territorial development, through local
or community actions, individual or collective, aimed at compliance with the
provisions and guidelines contained in this Complementary Law, under the supervision of the
local management body responsible for development policies.

§ 2º The Development
Agent must meet the following requirements:

I - reside in the area of the
community in which he/she operates;

II - have completed, with
satisfactory performance, a basic qualification course for the training of Development
Agents; and

III - have completed
elementary education.

		III - possess training or experience compatible with the function to be
		exercised;
		(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

		IV - preferably be a
		permanent employee of the Municipality.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)

§ 3o
The Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade, together with
municipalist entities and business support and representation entities, shall provide
support to said agents in the form of training, studies and research,
publications, and promotion of exchange of information and experiences.

		§ 3o
		 The Secretariat of Micro and Small Enterprises of the Presidency of the Republic,
		together with municipalist entities and business support and representation
entities, shall provide support to said agents in the form of training,
studies and research, publications, and promotion of exchange of information and
experiences.
(Wording given by Law No.
12.792, of 2013)

Art. 86.  Matters
addressed in this Complementary Law that are not constitutionally reserved to a
complementary law may be amended by ordinary law.

Art. 87.  § 1º of
art. 3º of

Complementary Law No. 63, of January 11, 1990, shall
take effect with the following wording:

	Art. 3o
	.......................................................................

	§ 1º  The
added value shall correspond, for each Municipality, to:

	I - the value of
goods sent out, plus the value of services rendered, within its
territory, less the value of goods received, in each calendar year;

	II - in cases of
simplified taxation referred to in the sole paragraph of

	art. 146 of the Federal Constitution, and, in other situations, in which entry controls
are waived, the added value shall be deemed to be the percentage of 32% (thirty-
two percent) of gross revenue.

	...................................................................................
(NR)

		Art. 87-A.  The Executive Powers of the
Union, States, Federal District and Municipalities shall issue, annually, by
November 30, each within its respective scope of competence, decrees
consolidating the applicable regulations relating to microenterprises and
small businesses.
(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)

Art. 88.  This Complementary
Law enters into force on the date of its publication, except for the taxation
regime for microenterprises and small businesses, which enters into force on
July 1, 2007.

Art. 89.  As of
July 1, 2007, the following are repealed:


Law No. 9.317, of December 5, 1996,
and

Law No. 9.841, of October 5, 1999.

Brasília, December 14,
2006; 185th year of Independence and 118th of the Republic.

LUIZ
INÁCIO LULA DA SILVA

Guido Mantega

Luiz Marinho

Luiz Fernando Furlan

Dilma Rousseff

This text does not replace the one
published in the DOU of 12/15/2006, republished on 1/31/2009, republished on 1/31/2012 and
republished on 3/6/2012.

ANNEX I OF COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(effective as of: 01/01/2012)

Rates and Distribution of Simples Nacional  Trade

			Gross
			Revenue in 12 months (in R$)

			RATE

			IRPJ

			CSLL

			COFINS

			PIS/PASEP

			CPP

			ICMS

			Up to 180,000.00

			4.00%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			2.75%

			1.25%

			From 180,000.01 to
			360,000.00

			5.47%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.86%

			0.00%

			2.75%

			1.86%

			From 360,000.01 to
			540,000.00

			6.84%

			0.27%

			0.31%

			0.95%

			0.23%

			2.75%

			2.33%

			From 540,000.01 to
			720,000.00

			7.54%

			0.35%

			0.35%

			1.04%

			0.25%

			2.99%

			2.56%

			From 720,000.01 to
			900,000.00

			7.60%

			0.35%

			0.35%

			1.05%

			0.25%

			3.02%

			2.58%

			From 900,000.01 to
			1,080,000.00

			8.28%

			0.38%

			0.38%

			1.15%

			0.27%

			3.28%

			2.82%

			From 1,080,000.01 to
			1,260,000.00

			8.36%

			0.39%

			0.39%

			1.16%

			0.28%

			3.30%

			2.84%

			From 1,260,000.01 to
			1,440,000.00

			8.45%

			0.39%

			0.39%

			1.17%

			0.28%

			3.35%

			2.87%

			From 1,440,000.01 to
			1,620,000.00

			9.03%

			0.42%

			0.42%

			1.25%

			0.30%

			3.57%

			3.07%

			From 1,620,000.01 to
			1,800,000.00

			9.12%

			0.43%

			0.43%

			1.26%

			0.30%

			3.60%

			3.10%

			From 1,800,000.01 to
			1,980,000.00

			9.95%

			0.46%

			0.46%

			1.38%

			0.33%

			3.94%

			3.38%

			From 1,980,000.01 to
			2,160,000.00

			10.04%

			0.46%

			0.46%

			1.39%

			0.33%

			3.99%

			3.41%

			From 2,160,000.01 to
			2,340,000.00

			10.13%

			0.47%

			0.47%

			1.40%

			0.33%

			4.01%

			3.45%

			From 2,340,000.01 to
			2,520,000.00

			10.23%

			0.47%

			0.47%

			1.42%

			0.34%

			4.05%

			3.48%

			From 2,520,000.01 to
			2,700,000.00

			10.32%

			0.48%

			0.48%

			1.43%

			0.34%

			4.08%

			3.51%

			From 2,700,000.01 to
			2,880,000.00

			11.23%

			0.52%

			0.52%

			1.56%

			0.37%

			4.44%

			3.82%

			From 2,880,000.01 to
			3,060,000.00

			11.32%

			0.52%

			0.52%

			1.57%

			0.37%

			4.49%

			3.85%

			From 3,060,000.01 to
			3,240,000.00

			11.42%

			0.53%

			0.53%

			1.58%

			0.38%

			4.52%

			3.88%

			From 3,240,000.01 to
			3,420,000.00

			11.51%

			0.53%

			0.53%

			1.60%

			0.38%

			4.56%

			3.91%

			From 3,420,000.01 to
			3,600,000.00

			11.61%

			0.54%

			0.54%

			1.60%

			0.38%

			4.60%

			3.95%

ANNEX I OF COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)     Taking effect

(See Complementary Law
No. 214, of 2025)  Taking effect

(Effective as of: 01/01/2018)

Rates and Distribution of
Simples Nacional  Trade

		Gross Revenue
		in 12 Months (in R$)

		Rate

		Amount to Deduct
		(in R$)

		1st
		Bracket

		Up to 180,000.00

		4.00%

		-

		2nd
		Bracket

		From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00

		7.30%

		5,940.00

		3rd
		Bracket

		From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00

		9.50%

		13,860.00

		4th
		Bracket

		From 720,000.01 to
		1,800,000.00

		10.70%

		22,500.00

		5th
		Bracket

		From 1,800,000.01 to
		3,600,000.00

		14.30%

		87,300.00

		6th
		Bracket

		From 3,600,000.01 to
		4,800,000.00

		19.00%

		378,000.00

		Brackets

		Percentage of
		Tax Distribution

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		CPP

		ICMS

		1st
		Bracket

		5.50%

		3.50%

		12.74%

		2.76%

		41.50%

		34.00%

		2nd
		Bracket

		5.50%

		3.50%

		12.74%

		2.76%

		41.50%

		34.00%

		3rd
		Bracket

		5.50%

		3.50%

		12.74%

		2.76%

		42.00%

		33.50%

		4th
		Bracket

		5.50%

		3.50%

		12.74%

		2.76%

		42.00%

		33.50%

		5th
		Bracket

		5.50%

		3.50%

		12.74%

		2.76%

		42.00%

		33.50%

		6th
		Bracket

		13.50%

		10.00%

		28.27%

		6.13%

		42.10%

		-

ANNEX II OF COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(effective as of: 01/01/2012)

Rates and Distribution of Simples Nacional  Industry

			Gross Revenue in 12
			months (in R$)

			RATE

			IRPJ

			CSLL

			COFINS

			PIS/PASEP

			CPP

			ICMS

			IPI

			Up to 180,000.00

			4.50%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			2.75%

			1.25%

			0.50%

			From
			180,000.01 to 360,000.00

			5.97%

			0.00%

			0.00%

			0.86%

			0.00%

			2.75%

			1.86%

			0.50%

			From
			360,000.01 to 540,000.00

			7.34%

			0.27%

			0.31%

			0.95%

			0.23%

			2.75%

			2.33%

			0.50%

			From
			540,000.01 to 720,000.00

			8.04%

			0.35%

			0.35%

			1.04%

			0.25%

			2.99%

			2.56%

			0.50%

			From
			720,000.01 to 900,000.00

			8.10%

			0.35%

			0.35%

			1.05%

			0.25%

			3.02%

			2.58%

			0.50%

			From
			900,000.01 to 1,080,000.00

			8.78%

			0.38%

			0.38%

			1.15%

			0.27%

			3.28%

			2,82%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.080.000,01 to 1.260.000,00

			8,86%

			0,39%

			0,39%

			1,16%

			0,28%

			3,30%

			2,84%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.260.000,01 to 1.440.000,00

			8,95%

			0,39%

			0,39%

			1,17%

			0,28%

			3,35%

			2,87%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.440.000,01 to 1.620.000,00

			9,53%

			0,42%

			0,42%

			1,25%

			0,30%

			3,57%

			3,07%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.620.000,01 to 1.800.000,00

			9,62%

			0,42%

			0,42%

			1,26%

			0,30%

			3,62%

			3,10%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.800.000,01 to 1.980.000,00

			10,45%

			0,46%

			0,46%

			1,38%

			0,33%

			3,94%

			3,38%

			0,50%

			From 
			1.980.000,01 to 2.160.000,00

			10,54%

			0,46%

			0,46%

			1,39%

			0,33%

			3,99%

			3,41%

			0,50%

			From 
			2.160.000,01 to 2.340.000,00

			10,63%

			0,47%

			0,47%

			1,40%

			0,33%

			4,01%

			3,45%

			0,50%

			From 
			2.340.000,01 to 2.520.000,00

			10,73%

			0,47%

			0,47%

			1,42%

			0,34%

			4,05%

			3,48%

			0,50%

			From 
			2.520.000,01 to 2.700.000,00

			10,82%

			0,48%

			0,48%

			1,43%

			0,34%

			4,08%

			3,51%

			0,50%

			From 
			2.700.000,01 to 2.880.000,00

			11,73%

			0,52%

			0,52%

			1,56%

			0,37%

			4,44%

			3,82%

			0,50%

			From 
			2.880.000,01 to 3.060.000,00

			11,82%

			0,52%

			0,52%

			1,57%

			0,37%

			4,49%

			3,85%

			0,50%

			From 
			3.060.000,01 to 3.240.000,00

			11,92%

			0,53%

			0,53%

			1,58%

			0,38%

			4,52%

			3,88%

			0,50%

			From 
			3.240.000,01 to 3.420.000,00

			12,01%

			0,53%

			0,53%

			1,60%

			0,38%

			4,56%

			3,91%

			0,50%

			From 
			3.420.000,01 to 3.600.000,00

			12,11%

			0,54%

			0,54%

			1,60%

			0,38%

			4,60%

			3,95%

			0,50%

ANNEX II TO COMPLEMENTARY 
LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(Wording given 
by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)     Effect to take place

(See Complementary Law 
No. 214, of 2025)  Effects to take place

(Effective date: 01/01/2018) 

Rates and Distribution of 
Simples Nacional – Industry 

		Gross Revenue 
		in 12 Months (in R$)

		Rate

		Amount to Deduct 
		(in R$)

		1st
		Bracket

		Up to 180.000,00

		4,50%

		-

		2nd 
		Bracket

		From 180.000,01 to 360.000,00

		7,80%

		5.940,00

		3rd 
		Bracket

		From 360.000,01 to 720.000,00

		10,00%

		13.860,00

		4th 
		Bracket

		From 720.000,01 to 
		1.800.000,00

		11,20%

		22.500,00

		5th 
		Bracket

		From 1.800.000,01 to 
		3.600.000,00

		14,70%

		85.500,00

		6th 
		Bracket

		From 3.600.000,01 to 
		4.800.000,00

		30,00%

		720.000,00

		Brackets

		Percentage of 
		Tax Distribution

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		CPP

		IPI

		ICMS

		1st 
		Bracket

		5,50%

		3,50%

		11,51%

		2,49%

		37,50%

		7,50%

		32,00%

		2nd 
		Bracket

		5,50%

		3,50%

		11,51%

		2,49%

		37,50%

		7,50%

		32,00%

		3rd 
		Bracket

		5,50%

		3,50%

		11,51%

		2,49%

		37,50%

		7,50%

		32,00%

		4th 
		Bracket

		5,50%

		3,50%

		11,51%

		2,49%

		37,50%

		7,50%

		32,00%

		5th 
		Bracket

		5,50%

		3,50%

		11,51%

		2,49%

		37,50%

		7,50%

		32,00%

		6th 
		Bracket

		8,50%

		7,50%

		20,96%

		4,54%

		23,50%

		35,00%

		-

 ANNEX 
III TO COMPLEMENTARY LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(effective date: 01/01/2012)

		Rates and Distribution of Simples Nacional - Revenue from the 
Leasing of Movable Property and the Provision of Services not listed in §§ 5-C 
and 5-D of art. 18 of this Complementary Law. 

			Gross Revenue in 12 months (in R$)

			RATE

			IRPJ

			CSLL

			COFINS

			PIS/PASEP

			CPP

			ISS

			Up to 180.000,00

			6,00%

			0,00%

			0,00%

			0,00%

			0,00%

			4,00%

			2,00%

			From 180.000,01 to 
			360.000,00

			8,21%

			0,00%

			0,00%

			1,42%

			0,00%

			4,00%

			2,79%

			From 360.000,01 to 
			540.000,00

			10,26%

			0,48%

			0,43%

			1,43%

			0,35%

			4,07%

			3,50%

			From 540.000,01 to 
			720.000,00

			11,31%

			0,53%

			0,53%

			1,56%

			0,38%

			4,47%

			3,84%

			From 720.000,01 to 
			900.000,00

			11,40%

			0,53%

			0,52%

			1,58%

			0,38%

			4,52%

			3,87%

			From 900.000,01 to 
			1.080.000,00

			12,42%

			0,57%

			0,57%

			1,73%

			0,40%

			4,92%

			4,23%

			From 1.080.000,01 to 
			1.260.000,00

			12,54%

			0,59%

			0,56%

			1,74%

			0,42%

			4,97%

			4,26%

			From 1.260.000,01 to 
			1.440.000,00

			12,68%

			0,59%

			0,57%

			1,76%

			0,42%

			5,03%

			4,31%

			From 1.440.000,01 to 
			1.620.000,00

			13,55%

			0,63%

			0,61%

			1,88%

			0,45%

			5,37%

			4,61%

			From 1.620.000,01 to 
			1.800.000,00

			13,68%

			0,63%

			0,64%

			1,89%

			0,45%

			5,42%

			4,65%

			From 1.800.000,01 to 
			1.980.000,00

			14,93%

			0,69%

			0,69%

			2,07%

			0,50%

			5,98%

			5,00%

			From 1.980.000,01 to 
			2.160.000,00

			15,06%

			0,69%

			0,69%

			2,09%

			0,50%

			6,09%

			5,00%

			From 2.160.000,01 to 
			2.340.000,00

			15,20%

			0,71%

			0,70%

			2,10%

			0,50%

			6,19%

			5,00%

			From 2.340.000,01 to 
			2.520.000,00

			15,35%

			0,71%

			0,70%

			2,13%

			0,51%

			6,30%

			5,00%

			From 2.520.000,01 to 
			2.700.000,00

			15,48%

			0,72%

			0,70%

			2,15%

			0,51%

			6,40%

			5,00%

			From 2.700.000,01 to 
			2.880.000,00

			16,85%

			0,78%

			0,76%

			2,34%

			0,56%

			7,41%

			5,00%

			From 2.880.000,01 to 
			3.060.000,00

			16,98%

			0,78%

			0,78%

			2,36%

			0,56%

			7,50%

			5,00%

			From 3.060.000,01 to 
			3.240.000,00

			17,13%

			0,80%

			0,79%

			2,37%

			0,57%

			7,60%

			5,00%

			From 3,240,000.01 to
			3,420,000.00

			17.27%

			0.80%

			0.79%

			2.40%

			0.57%

			7.71%

			5.00%

			From 3,420,000.01 to
			3,600,000.00

			17.42%

			0.81%

			0.79%

			2.42%

			0.57%

			7.83%

			5.00%

ANNEX
III TO COMPLEMENTARY LAW No 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)     Effectiveness pending

(See Complementary Law
No. 214, of 2025)  Effects pending

(Effective as of: 01/01/2018)

Rates and Distribution of the
Simples Nacional - Revenue from the leasing of movable property and from the provision of services
not listed in § 5-C
of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

		Gross Revenue
		in the last 12 Months (in R$)

		Rate

		Amount to Deduct
		(in R$)

		1st
		Bracket

		Up to 180,000.00

		6.00%



		2nd
		Bracket

		From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00

		11.20%

		9,360.00

		3rd
		Bracket

		From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00

		13.50%

		17,640.00

		4th
		Bracket

		From 720,000.01 to
		1,800,000.00

		16.00%

		35,640.00

		5th
		Bracket

		From 1,800,000.01 to
		3,600,000.00

		21.00%

		125,640.00

		6th
		Bracket

		From 3,600,000.01 to
		4,800,000.00

		33.00%

		648,000.00

		Brackets

		Percentage of
		Tax Distribution

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		CPP

		ISS (*)

		1st
		Bracket

		4.00%

		3.50%

		12.82%

		2.78%

		43.40%

		33.50%

		2nd
		Bracket

		4.00%

		3.50%

		14.05%

		3.05%

		43.40%

		32.00%

		3rd
		Bracket

		4.00%

		3.50%

		13.64%

		2.96%

		43.40%

		32.50%

		4th
		Bracket

		4.00%

		3.50%

		13.64%

		2.96%

		43.40%

		32.50%

		5th
		Bracket

		4.00%

		3.50%

		12.82%

		2.78%

		43.40%

		33.50% (*)

		6th
		Bracket

		35.00%

		15.00%

		16.03%

		3.47%

		30.50%



		(*) The maximum effective
		percentage owed to the ISS shall be 5%, with the difference being transferred, proportionally,
		to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
		bracket. Thus, in the 5th
		bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution
		shall be:

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		CPP

		ISS

		5th
		Bracket, with

		effective rate exceeding


		14.92537%

		(Effective rate

		5%) x

		6.02%

		(Effective rate

		5%) x

		5.26%

		(Effective rate

		5%) x

		19.28%

		(Effective rate

		5%) x

		4.18%

		(Effective rate

		5%) x

		65.26%

		ISS percentage fixed at
		5%

ANNEX IV TO COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(effective as of: 01/01/2012)

Rates and Distribution of the
Simples Nacional - Revenue arising from the provision of services listed in
§ 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law.

			Gross Revenue in the last 12 months (in R$)

			Rate

			IRPJ

			CSLL

			COFINS

			PIS/PASEP

			ISS

			Up to 180,000.00

			4.50%

			0.00%

			1.22%

			1.28%

			0.00%

			2.00%

			From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00

			6.54%

			0.00%

			1.84%

			1.91%

			0.00%

			2.79%

			From 360,000.01 to 540,000.00

			7.70%

			0.16%

			1.85%

			1.95%

			0.24%

			3.50%

			From 540,000.01 to 720,000.00

			8.49%

			0.52%

			1.87%

			1.99%

			0.27%

			3.84%

			From 720,000.01 to 900,000.00

			8.97%

			0.89%

			1.89%

			2.03%

			0.29%

			3.87%

			From 900,000.01 to 1,080,000.00

			9.78%

			1.25%

			1.91%

			2.07%

			0.32%

			4.23%

			From 1,080,000.01 to 1,260,000.00

			10.26%

			1.62%

			1.93%

			2.11%

			0.34%

			4.26%

			From 1,260,000.01 to 1,440,000.00

			10.76%

			2.00%

			1.95%

			2.15%

			0.35%

			4.31%

			From 1,440,000.01 to 1,620,000.00

			11.51%

			2.37%

			1.97%

			2.19%

			0.37%

			4.61%

			From 1,620,000.01 to 1,800,000.00

			12.00%

			2.74%

			2.00%

			2.23%

			0.38%

			4.65%

			From 1,800,000.01 to 1,980,000.00

			12.80%

			3.12%

			2.01%

			2.27%

			0.40%

			5.00%

			From 1,980,000.01 to 2,160,000.00

			13.25%

			3.49%

			2.03%

			2.31%

			0.42%

			5.00%

			From 2,160,000.01 to 2,340,000.00

			13.70%

			3.86%

			2.05%

			2.35%

			0.44%

			5.00%

			From 2,340,000.01 to 2,520,000.00

			14.15%

			4.23%

			2.07%

			2.39%

			0.46%

			5.00%

			From 2,520,000.01 to 2,700,000.00

			14.60%

			4.60%

			2.10%

			2.43%

			0.47%

			5.00%

			From 2,700,000.01 to 2,880,000.00

			15.05%

			4.90%

			2.19%

			2.47%

			0.49%

			5.00%

			From 2,880,000.01 to 3,060,000.00

			15.50%

			5.21%

			2.27%

			2.51%

			0.51%

			5.00%

			From 3,060,000.01 to 3,240,000.00

			15.95%

			5.51%

			2.36%

			2.55%

			0.53%

			5.00%

			From 3,240,000.01 to 3,420,000.00

			16.40%

			5.81%

			2.45%

			2.59%

			0.55%

			5.00%

			From 3,420,000.01 to 3,600,000.00

			16.85%

			6.12%

			2.53%

			2.63%

			0.57%

			5.00%

ANNEX IV TO COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)     Effectiveness pending

(See Complementary Law
No. 214, of 2025)  Effects pending

(Effective as of: 01/01/2018)

Rates and Distribution of the
Simples Nacional  Revenue arising from the provision of services listed in
§ 5-C
of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

		Gross Revenue
		in the last 12 Months (in R$)

		Rate

		Amount to Deduct
		(in R$)

		1st
		Bracket

		Up to 180,000.00

		4.50%

		-

		2nd
		Bracket

		From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00

		9.00%

		8,100.00

		3rd
		Bracket

		From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00

		10.20%

		12,420.00

		4th
		Bracket

		From 720,000.01 to
		1,800,000.00

		14.00%

		39,780.00

		5th
		Bracket

		From 1,800,000.01 to
		3,600,000.00

		22.00%

		183,780.00

		6th
		Bracket

		From 3,600,000.01 to
		4,800,000.00

		33.00%

		828,000.00

		Brackets

		Percentage of
		Tax Distribution

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		ISS (*)

		1st
		Bracket

		18.80%

		15.20%

		17.67%

		3.83%

		44.50%

		2nd
		Bracket

		19.80%

		15.20%

		20.55%

		4.45%

		40.00%

		3rd
		Bracket

		20.80%

		15.20%

		19.73%

		4.27%

		40.00%

		4th
		Bracket

		17.80%

		19.20%

		18.90%

		4.10%

		40.00%

		5th
		Bracket

		18.80%

		19.20%

		18.08%

		3.92%

		40.00% (*)

		6th
		Bracket

		53.50%

		21.50%

		20.55%

		4.45%

		-

		(*) The maximum effective
		percentage owed to the ISS shall be 5%, with the difference being transferred, proportionally,
		to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
		bracket. Thus, in the 5th
		bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution
		shall be:

		Bracket

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		ISS

		5th
		Bracket, with effective rate exceeding 12.5%

		Effective rate  5%) x
		31.33%

		(Effective rate  5%) x
		32.00%

		(Effective rate  5%) x
		30.13%

		Effective rate  5%) x
		6.54%

		ISS percentage fixed at
		5%

ANNEX V TO COMPLEMENTARY
LAW No 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006.

								(effective as of: 01/01/2012)

								Rates and Distribution of Simples Nacional - Revenue 
arising from the provision of services listed in § 5-D of art. 18 
of this Complementary Law. 

								1) The ratio (r) shall be calculated as follows:

								(r) = Payroll including charges (in 12 
months)

								Gross Revenue (in 12 
months)

								2) In cases where 
(r) falls within the hundredths intervals of Table V-A, where "<" means 
less than, ">" means greater than, "≤" means equal to or less than, and "≥" 
means greater than or equal to, the Simples Nacional rates relating to 
IRPJ, PIS/Pasep, CSLL, Cofins and CPP shall correspond to the following:

TABLE V-A

			Gross Revenue in 12 months (in R$)

			(r)<0,10

			0,10≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,15

			0,15≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,20

			0,20≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,25

			0,25≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,30

			0,30≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,35

			0,35≤ (r)

			and

			(r) < 0,40

			(r) ≥ 0,40

			Up to 180.000,00

			17,50%

			15,70%

			13,70%

			11,82%

			10,47%

			9,97%

			8,80%

			8,00%

			From 180.000,01 to 360.000,00

			17,52%

			15,75%

			13,90%

			12,60%

			12,33%

			10,72%

			9,10%

			8,48%

			From 360.000,01 to 540.000,00

			17,55%

			15,95%

			14,20%

			12,90%

			12,64%

			11,11%

			9,58%

			9,03%

			From 540.000,01 to 720.000,00

			17,95%

			16,70%

			15,00%

			13,70%

			13,45%

			12,00%

			10,56%

			9,34%

			From 720.000,01 to 900.000,00

			18,15%

			16,95%

			15,30%

			14,03%

			13,53%

			12,40%

			11,04%

			10,06%

			From 900.000,01 to 1.080.000,00

			18,45%

			17,20%

			15,40%

			14,10%

			13,60%

			12,60%

			11,60%

			10,60%

			From 1.080.000,01 to 1.260.000,00

			18,55%

			17,30%

			15,50%

			14,11%

			13,68%

			12,68%

			11,68%

			10,68%

			From 1.260.000,01 to 1.440.000,00

			18,62%

			17,32%

			15,60%

			14,12%

			13,69%

			12,69%

			11,69%

			10,69%

			From 1.440.000,01 to 1.620.000,00

			18,72%

			17,42%

			15,70%

			14,13%

			14,08%

			13,08%

			12,08%

			11,08%

			From 1.620.000,01 to 1.800.000,00

			18,86%

			17,56%

			15,80%

			14,14%

			14,09%

			13,09%

			12,09%

			11,09%

			From 1.800.000,01 to 1.980.000,00

			18,96%

			17,66%

			15,90%

			14,49%

			14,45%

			13,61%

			12,78%

			11,87%

			From 1.980.000,01 to 2.160.000,00

			19,06%

			17,76%

			16,00%

			14,67%

			14,64%

			13,89%

			13,15%

			12,28%

			From 2.160.000,01 to 2.340.000,00

			19,26%

			17,96%

			16,20%

			14,86%

			14,82%

			14,17%

			13,51%

			12,68%

			From 2.340.000,01 to 2.520.000,00

			19,56%

			18,30%

			16,50%

			15,46%

			15,18%

			14,61%

			14,04%

			13,26%

			From 2.520.000,01 to 2.700.000,00

			20,70%

			19,30%

			17,45%

			16,24%

			16,00%

			15,52%

			15,03%

			14,29%

			From 2.700.000,01 to 2.880.000,00

			21,20%

			20,00%

			18,20%

			16,91%

			16,72%

			16,32%

			15,93%

			15,23%

			From 2.880.000,01 to 3.060.000,00

			21,70%

			20,50%

			18,70%

			17,40%

			17,13%

			16,82%

			16,38%

			16,17%

			From 3.060.000,01 to 3.240.000,00

			22,20%

			20,90%

			19,10%

			17,80%

			17,55%

			17,22%

			16,82%

			16,51%

			From 3.240.000,01 to 3.420.000,00

			22,50%

			21,30%

			19,50%

			18,20%

			17,97%

			17,44%

			17,21%

			16,94%

			From 3.420.000,01 to 3.600.000,00

			22,90%

			21,80%

			20,00%

			18,60%

			18,40%

			17,85%

			17,60%

			17,18%

								3) The Simples Nacional rate relating 
to IRPJ, PIS/Pasep, CSLL, Cofins and CPP calculated as above shall be added to the portion 
corresponding to ISS provided for in Annex IV to this Complementary Law.

								4) The distribution of revenue relating to IRPJ, 
PIS/Pasep, CSLL, Cofins and CPP collected under this Annex shall be carried out 
based on the parameters set out in Table V-B, where:

								(I) = percentage points of the distribution allocated to CPP;

								(J) = percentage points of the distribution allocated to 
IRPJ, calculated after the result of factor (I);

								(K) = percentage points of the distribution allocated to CSLL, 
calculated after the result of factors (I) and (J);

								(L) = percentage points of the distribution allocated to 
COFINS, calculated after the result of factors (I), (J) and (K);

								(M) = percentage points of the distribution allocated to 
the PIS/Pasep contribution, calculated after the results of factors (I), 
(J), (K) and (L);

								(I) + (J) + (K) + (L) + (M) = 100

								N = the ratio (r) divided by 0,004, the result being limited 
to 100;

								P = 0,1 divided by the ratio (r), the result being limited 
to 1.

TABLE V-B:

				Gross Revenue 
				in 12 months (in R$)

				CPP

				IRPJ

				CSLL

				COFINS

				PIS/PASEP

				I

				J

				K

				L

				M

			Up to 180.000,00

			N x

			0,9

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 180.000,01 to
			360.000,00

			N x

			0,875

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 360.000,01 to
			540.000,00

			N x

			0,85

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 540.000,01 to
			720.000,00

			N x

			0,825

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 720.000,01 to
			900.000,00

			N x

			0,8

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 900.000,01 to
			1.080.000,00

			N x

			0,775

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.080.000,01 to
			1.260.000,00

			N x

			0,75

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.260.000,01 to
			1.440.000,00

			N x

			0,725

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.440.000,01 to
			1.620.000,00

			N x

			0,7

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.620.000,01 to
			1.800.000,00

			N x

			0,675

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.800.000,01 to
			1.980.000,00

			N x

			0,65

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 1.980.000,01 to
			2.160.000,00

			N x

			0,625

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 2.160.000,01 to
			2.340.000,00

			N x

			0,6

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 2.340.000,01 to 
			2.520.000,00

			N x

			0,575

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 2.520.000,01 to 
			2.700.000,00

			N x

			0,55

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 2.700.000,01 to 
			2.880.000,00

			N x

			0,525

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 2.880.000,01 to 
			3.060.000,00

			N x

			0,5

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 3.060.000,01 to 
			3.240.000,00

			N x

			0,475

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 3.240.000,01 to 
			3.420.000,00

			N x

			0,45

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

			From 3.420.000,01 to 
			3.600.000,00

			N x

			0,425

			0,75 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,25 X

			(100 - I)

			X P

			0,75 X

			(100 - I - J - K)

			100 - I - J - K - L

ANNEX V TO 
COMPLEMENTARY LAW No. 123, OF DECEMBER 14, 2006. 

(Wording given by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)     Effects

(Vide Lei Complementar 
nº 214, de 2025)  Produção de efeitos

(Effective date: 01/01/2018) 

Rates and Distribution under 
Simples Nacional - Revenues arising from the provision of services listed in 
§ 5-I 
of art. 18 of this Complementary Law 

		Gross Revenue 
		in 12 Months (in R$)

		Rate

		Amount to Deduct 
		(in R$)

		1st 
		Bracket

		Up to 180.000,00

		15,50%

		-

		2nd 
		Bracket

		From 180.000,01 to 360.000,00

		18,00%

		4.500,00

		3rd 
		Bracket

		From 360.000,01 to 720.000,00

		19,50%

		9.900,00

		4th 
		Bracket

		From 720.000,01 to 
		1.800.000,00

		20,50%

		17.100,00

		5th 
		Bracket

		From 1.800.000,01 to 
		3.600.000,00

		23,00%

		62.100,00

		6th 
		Bracket

		From 3.600.000,01 to 
		4.800.000,00

		30,50%

		540.000,00

		Brackets

		Percentage of 
		Distribution of Taxes

		IRPJ

		CSLL

		Cofins

		PIS/Pasep

		CPP

		ISS

		1st 
		Bracket

		25,00%

		15,00%

		14,10%

		3,05%

		28,85%

		14,00%

		2nd 
		Bracket

		23,00%

		15,00%

		14,10%

		3,05%

		27,85%

		17,00%

		3rd 
		Bracket

		24,00%

		15,00%

		14,92%

		3,23%

		23,85%

		19,00%

		4th 
		Bracket

		21,00%

		15,00%

		15,74%

		3,41%

		23,85%

		21,00%

		5th 
		Bracket

		23,00%

		12,50%

		14,10%

		3,05%

		23,85%

		23,50%

		6th 
		Bracket

		35,00%

		15,50%

		16,44%

		3,56%

		29,50%

		-

ANNEX VI

		        (Added by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)   
(Effects)

(Revoked by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)        
(Effective date)

(Effective date: 1st 
of January, 2015) 

				Rates and 
Distribution under Simples Nacional - Revenues arising from the provision of services 
listed in § 5-I of art. 18 of this Complementary Law.

				1) The ratio (r) shall be 
determined as follows: 

				(r) = 
				Payroll including charges (in 12 months)

				Gross Revenue (in 
12 months)

				2) The distribution of 
revenues related to IRPJ, PIS/Pasep, CSLL, Cofins and CPP collected under 
this Annex shall be carried out based on the parameters defined in Table V-B of 
Annex V of this Complementary Law.

				3) Regardless of the 
result of the ratio (r), the Simples Nacional rates shall correspond to the 
following:

TABLE VI 

			Gross Revenue in 12 
			months (in R$)

			Rate

			IRPJ, PIS/Pasep, CSLL, 
			Cofins  and CPP

			ISS

			Up to 180.000,00

			16,93%

			14,93%

			2,00%

			From 180.000,01 to 
			360.000,00

			17,72%

			14,93%

			2,79%

			From 360.000,01 to 
			540.000,00

			18,43%

			14,93%

			3,50%

			From 540.000,01 to 
			720.000,00

			18,77%

			14,93%

			3,84%

			From 720.000,01 to 
			900.000,00

			19,04%

			15,17%

			3,87%

			From 900.000,01 to 
			1.080.000,00

			19,94%

			15,71%

			4,23%

			From 1.080.000,01 to 
			1.260.000,00

			20,34%

			16,08%

			4,26%

			From 1.260.000,01 to 
			1.440.000,00

			20,66%

			16,35%

			4,31%

			From 1.440.000,01 to 
			1.620.000,00

			21,17%

			16,56%

			4,61%

			From 1.620.000,01 to 
			1.800.000,00

			21,38%

			16,73%

			4,65%

			From 1.800.000,01 to 
			1.980.000,00

			21,86%

			16,86%

			5,00%

			From 1.980.000,01 to 
			2.160.000,00

			21,97%

			16,97%

			5,00%

			From 2.160.000,01 to 
			2.340.000,00

			22,06%

			17,06%

			5,00%

			From 2.340.000,01 to 
			2.520.000,00

			22,14%

			17,14%

			5,00%

			From 2.520.000,01 to 
			2.700.000,00

			22,21%

			17,21%

			5,00%

			From 2.700.000,01 to 
			2.880.000,00

			22,21%

			17,21%

			5,00%

			From 2.880.000,01 to 
			3.060.000,00

			22,32%

			17,32%

			5,00%

			From 3.060.000,01 to 
			3.240.000,00

			22,37%

			17,37%

			5,00%

			From 3.240.000,01 to 
			3.420.000,00

			22,41%

			17,41%

			5,00%

			From 3.420.000,01 to 
			3.600.000,00

			22,45%

			17,45%

			5,00%

		Annex VII

(Vide Lei Complementar 
nº 214, de 2025)  Produção de efeitos

*

