

                                                                       Office of the President of the Republic
                                                                                       Civil House
                                                                 Special Secretariat for Legal Affairs

                                                       COMPLEMENTARY LAW No. 214, OF JANUARY 16, 2025

  Veto message

  Production of effects

  Production of effects                                                                  Institutes the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS), the Social
                                                                                       Contribution on Goods and Services (CBS) and the Selective Tax (IS); creates the
  (Promulgation of vetoed parts)                                                         IBS Management Committee and amends the
                                                                                       tax legislation.

  Compiled text

  (See Decree No. 12,955, of 2026)

        THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Hereby makes known that the National Congress decrees and I sanction the following Complementary Law:

                                                                                      BOOK I

                              ON THE TAX ON GOODS AND SERVICES (IBS) AND THE SOCIAL CONTRIBUTION ON GOODS AND SERVICES (CBS)

                                                                                      TITLE I

                                                                    ON THE GENERAL RULES OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

                                                                                    CHAPTER I

                                                                          PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

        Art. 1 The following are hereby instituted:

        I - the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS), of shared competence among States, Municipalities and the Federal District, as provided in art. 156-A of the Federal
  Constitution; and

        II - the Social Contribution on Goods and Services (CBS), of competence of the Union, as provided in item V of the caput of art. 195 of the Federal Constitution.

        Art. 2 The IBS and the CBS are informed by the principle of neutrality, according to which these taxes must avoid distorting consumption decisions and the
  organization of economic activity, observed the exceptions provided in the Federal Constitution and in this Complementary Law.

        Art. 3 For the purposes of this Complementary Law, the following are considered:

        I - operations with:

        a) goods, any and all that involve movable or immovable property, tangible or intangible, including rights;

        b) services, all others that are not classified as operations with goods under item "a" of this item;

        II - supply:

        a) delivery or making available of tangible goods;

        b) institution, transfer, assignment, grant, licensing or making available of intangible goods, including rights;

        c) provision or making available of a service;

        III - supplier: a natural or legal person who, resident or domiciled in the Country or abroad, carries out the supply;

        IV - acquirer:

        a) the person obligated to payment or any other form of consideration for the supply of goods or services;

       b) in cases of payment or any other form of consideration on behalf of and in the name of third parties, the person on whose account or in whose
  name the obligation to pay or any other form of consideration for the supply of goods or services arises; and

        V - recipient: the person to whom the goods or services are supplied, who may or may not be the acquirer itself.

        § 1 For the purposes of this Complementary Law, energies with economic value are treated as tangible goods.

       § 2 Included in the concept of supplier under item III of the caput of this article are entities without legal personality, including an unincorporated
  common company, an undisclosed partnership (sociedade em conta de participação), a consortium, a condominium and an investment fund.

         § 3 Included in the operations under item "a" of item I of the caput of this article are the leasing, letting and temporary assignment of the property.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                    CHAPTER II

                                                       ON THE IBS AND THE CBS ON OPERATIONS WITH GOODS AND SERVICES

                                                                                       Section I

                                                                           On the Hypotheses of Incidence

        Art. 4 The IBS and the CBS are levied on onerous operations with goods or services.

        § 1 Non-onerous operations with goods or services will be taxed in the hypotheses expressly provided in this Complementary Law.

        § 2 For the purposes of the provisions of this article, an onerous operation with goods or services is considered to be any supply with consideration, including that
  arising from:

          I - purchase and sale, exchange or barter, payment in kind (dação em pagamento) and other forms of transfer;

          II - leasing (locação);

          III - licensing, grant, assignment;

          IV - onerous loan (mútuo oneroso);

          V - donation with consideration in favor of the donor;

          VI - onerous constitution of rights in rem;

          VII - leasing (arrendamento), including finance leasing; and

          VIII - provision of services.

          § 3 The following are irrelevant to the characterization of the operations covered by this article:

          I - the legal title under which the goods are held in the possession of the supplier;

          II - the kind, type or legal form, the legal validity and the effects of the acts or legal transactions;

          III - the obtainment of profit from the operation; and

          IV - compliance with legal, regulatory or administrative requirements.

         § 4 The IBS and the CBS are levied on any operation with goods or services carried out by the taxpayer, including those carried out with non-current
  assets or in the exercise of non-habitual economic activity, observed the provisions of § 4 of art. 57 of this Complementary Law.

         § 4 The IBS and the CBS are levied on any operation with goods or services carried out by the taxpayer, including those carried out with non-current
  assets or in the exercise of non-habitual economic activity. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 5 The incidence of the IBS and the CBS on the operations covered by the caput of this article does not alter the tax base of the:

        I - Tax on the Transmission Causa Mortis and Donation of Any Goods or Rights (ITCD), provided in item I of the caput of art. 155 of the Federal
  Constitution;

        II - Tax on the Inter Vivos Transmission of Real Property and Related Rights (ITBI), provided in item II of the caput of art. 156 of the Federal
  Constitution.

         § 6 The acquisition and supply, by a natural person characterized as a taxpayer, of goods and services not related to the development of their
  economic activity are subject to the same rules applicable to non-taxpayers. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 5 The IBS and the CBS also apply to the following operations:

          I - non-onerous supply or supply at a value below market value of goods and services, in the hypotheses provided in this Complementary Law;

          I - non-onerous supply or supply at a value below market value of goods and services:          (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) acquired by the taxpayer, that have permitted the appropriation of IBS and CBS credits, for:              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

          1. the taxpayer itself, if the taxpayer is a natural person;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        2. the natural persons who are partners, shareholders, administrators and members of boards of directors and audit boards and advisory committees of the
  board of directors of the taxpayer provided for by law; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          3. the employees of the taxpayer; and        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         4. the spouses, partners or relatives, by blood or by affinity, up to the third degree, of the natural persons referred to in items 1 to 3 of this item;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) produced or provided by the taxpayer for:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          1. the natural persons referred to in items 2 and 3 of item "a" of this item; and       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        2. the spouses, partners or relatives, by blood or by affinity, up to the third degree, of the natural persons referred to in item 1 of this item; and         (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          c) in the other hypotheses provided in this Complementary Law;           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - supply of gifts and bonuses (brindes e bonificações);

         III - transmission, by the taxpayer, to a partner or shareholder that is not a taxpayer under the regular regime, by return of capital, dividends in kind or in
  another form, of goods whose acquisition permitted the appropriation of credits by the taxpayer, including in production; and

          IV - other non-onerous supplies or supplies at a value below market value of goods and services by a taxpayer to a related party.

          § 1 The provisions of item II of the caput of this article:

          I - do not apply to bonuses that are stated on the respective tax document and that do not depend on a subsequent event; and

          II - apply to goods given as a bonus subject to a specific rate per unit of measure, including in the hypothesis of item I of this paragraph.

        § 2 For the purposes of this Complementary Law, parties are considered related when at least one of them is subject to influence, exercised
  directly or indirectly by another party, that could lead to the establishment of terms and conditions in their transactions that diverge from those that would be
  established between unrelated parties in comparable transactions.

          § 3 The following are considered related parties, without prejudice to other hypotheses that fall under the provisions of § 2 of this article:

          I - the controlling party and its controlled companies;

          II - affiliated companies (coligadas);



         III - entities included in consolidated financial statements or that would be included if the final controlling party of the multinational group of which they are
  part prepared such statements if its capital were traded on the securities markets of its jurisdiction of residence;

        IV - entities, when one of them has the right to receive, directly or indirectly, at least 25% (twenty-five percent) of the profits of the other or of
  its assets in the event of liquidation;

        V - entities that are, directly or indirectly, under common control or in which the same partner, shareholder or holder holds 20% (twenty percent) or
  more of the capital stock of each one;

         VI - entities in which the same partners or shareholders, or their spouses, partners, relatives, by blood or by affinity, up to the third degree,
  hold at least 20% (twenty percent) of the capital stock of each one; and

         VII - the entity and the natural person who is a spouse, partner or relative, by blood or by affinity, up to the third degree, of a director, of an officer or of a
  controlling party of that entity.

        § 4 For purposes of the definition of related parties, the term "entity" comprises natural and legal persons and entities without legal personality.

        § 5 For purposes of § 3 of this article, a control relationship is characterized when an entity:

         I - holds, directly or indirectly, alone or jointly with other entities, including due to the existence of voting agreements, rights that
  assure it preponderance in corporate resolutions or the power to elect or remove the majority of the administrators of another entity;

        II - participates, directly or indirectly, in more than 50% (fifty percent) of the capital stock of another entity; or

        III - holds or exercises the power to administer or manage, directly or indirectly, the activities of another entity.

         § 6 For purposes of item II of § 3 of this article, an affiliated company (coligada) is considered to be an entity that holds significant influence over another entity, as
  provided in §§ 1, 4 and 5 of art. 243 of Law No. 6,404, of December 15, 1976.

         § 7 The regulation may relax the requirement to verify market value under item IV of the caput of this article in operations between related
  parties, provided that such operations are not subject to a prohibition on the appropriation of credits, within the scope of tax compliance programs.

          § 8 The provisions of items "a" and "b" of item I of the caput of this article do not apply to the supply to the natural persons referred to therein of goods and services
  predominantly used in the taxpayer's economic activity, according to the criteria provided in items IV and V of § 3 of art. 57 of this Complementary
  Law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 9 The non-onerous supply or supply at a value below market value of the goods and services in the hypotheses under items "a" and "b" of item I of the caput
  of this article will be taxed in an amount equivalent to the IBS and the CBS levied on the market value of the goods or service. (Included by Complementary Law
  No. 227, of 2026)

        § 10. The regulation will provide for simplified and optional criteria for the taxation of the supply of goods and services in the hypotheses under the
  items "a" and "b" of item I of the caput of this article for temporary use by the natural persons referred to therein. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        Art. 6 The IBS and the CBS are not levied on:

        I - supply of services by natural persons as a result of:

        a) an employment relationship with the taxpayer; or

         b) their role as administrators or members of boards of directors and audit boards and advisory committees of the board of directors of the
  taxpayer provided for by law;

         II - transfer of goods between establishments belonging to the same taxpayer, observed the obligation to issue an electronic tax document,
  under item II of § 2 of art. 60 of this Complementary Law;

       III - write-off, liquidation and transmission, including disposal, of an equity interest, except as provided in item III of the caput of art. 5 of this Complementary
  Law;

         IV - transmission of goods as a result of merger, spin-off and incorporation and of paid-in capital and return of capital, except as provided in item III of the caput
  of art. 5 of this Complementary Law;

        V - financial income, except when included in the tax base under the specific regime for financial services covered by Chapter II of Title V
  of this Book and the tax-base calculation rule provided in item II of § 1 of art. 12 of this Complementary Law;

         VI - receipt of dividends and interest on equity, of interest or remuneration on capital paid by cooperatives and the results of valuation of
  equity interests, except as provided in item III of the caput of art. 5 of this Complementary Law;

         VII - other operations with securities, except as provided for such operations under the specific regime for financial services covered by
  Section III of Chapter II of Title V of this Book, under the terms of that regime and of the other situations expressly provided in this Complementary Law;

        VIII - donations without consideration in favor of the donor;

        IX - transfers of public funds and other public assets to civil society organizations organized as non-profit legal entities
  in the Country, by means of fostering agreements (termos de fomento), collaboration agreements, cooperation agreements, partnership agreements, decentralized execution agreements, management
  contracts, transfer agreements, subsidies, covenants and other instruments entered into by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations;

        X - allocation of resources by a cooperative society to the funds provided in art. 28 of Law No. 5,764, of December 16, 1971, and the reversion of the
  resources of such reserves; and

          XI - the pass-through by the cooperative to its members of amounts arising from the operations provided in the caput of art. 271 of this Complementary Law and the
  distribution in cash of surpluses (sobras) by a cooperative society to its members, calculated in the statement of income for the year, except as provided in item
  III of the caput of art. 5 of this Complementary Law.

        XII - statutory associative contributions, of a non-consideration nature and intended for the maintenance of civil associations without economic purposes
  that meet the requirements set forth in art. 14 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code).     (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

         § 1 The IBS and the CBS are levied on the set of acts or legal transactions involving the hypotheses provided in items III to VII of the caput of this article that
  constitute, in essence, an onerous operation with goods or services.

        § 2 If the donations under item VIII of the caput of this article have as their object goods or services that permitted the appropriation of credits by the
  donor, including in production:

        I - the donation will be taxed based on the market value of the goods or service donated; or
          II - at the taxpayer's option, the credits will be canceled.

        Art. 7 In the case of the supply of different goods and services in a single operation, it will be mandatory to specify each supply and its
  respective value, except if:

          I - all the supplies are subject to the same tax treatment; or

         II - one of the supplies can be considered principal and the others its ancillary items, in which case a single supply will be deemed to occur,
  applying to it the tax treatment corresponding to the principal supply.

        § 1 For purposes of item I of the caput of this article, there is distinct tax treatment when the supplies are subject to different rules regarding
  incidence, taxation regimes, exemption, the moment of occurrence of the taxable event, the place of the operation, the rate, taxable-person status and non-cumulativity.

         § 2 For purposes of item II of the caput of this article, ancillary supplies are considered to be those that are a condition or means for the
  principal supply.

         § 3 If there is unified billing for different supplies in disagreement with the provisions of this article, each supply will be considered independent
  for all purposes and the tax base corresponding to each will be assessed (arbitrada) under art. 13 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 7-A. If it is possible to apply more than one of the following mechanisms to the same operation, the following order of application will prevail:
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - reduction of the rate to zero;    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - suspension with conversion into a zero rate;        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - exemption;   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          IV - deferral; and   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          V - a rate reduction distinct from that under item I.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Sole paragraph. If it is possible to apply more than one rate reduction to the same operation:                 (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

          I - the cumulative application of the reductions will only occur if expressly provided for; and           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - if there is no provision for accumulation, the greater reduction will prevail.          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                         Section II

                                                                                      On Immunities

          Art. 8 Exports of goods and services are immune from the IBS and the CBS, under the terms of Chapter V of this Title.

          Art. 9 Also immune from the IBS and the CBS are supplies:

          I - carried out by the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities;

          II - carried out by religious entities and temples of any faith, including their welfare and charitable organizations;

         III - carried out by political parties, including their institutes and foundations, workers' union entities and non-profit educational and social
  assistance institutions;

          IV - of books, newspapers, periodicals and the paper intended for their printing;

         V - of phonograms and music videograms produced in Brazil containing musical or literary-musical works by Brazilian authors and/or works generally
  performed by Brazilian artists, as well as the physical media or digital files containing them, except at the stage of industrial replication of laser-read optical media;

          VI - of communication services in the modalities of free and unrestricted-reception radio and television broadcasting; and

          VII - of gold, when defined by law as a financial asset or foreign-exchange instrument.

         § 1 The immunity provided in item I of the caput of this article extends to autarchies and to foundations instituted and maintained by public authorities and to the
  public company providing postal services, as well as:

          I - it comprises only operations related to their essential purposes or those arising therefrom;

        II - it does not apply to operations related to the exploitation of economic activities governed by the rules applicable to private enterprises or in
  which there is consideration or payment of prices or tariffs by the user; and

          III - it does not exempt the prospective buyer from the obligation to pay tax with respect to real property.

          § 2 For the purposes of item II of the caput of this article, the following are considered:

          I - a religious entity and temple of any faith, a private-law non-profit legal entity whose objectives are to profess religious faith and practice
  religion; and

        II - a welfare and charitable organization, a private-law non-profit legal entity linked to and maintained by a religious entity and temple of
  any faith, that supplies goods and services in the area of social assistance, without discrimination against or requirements of any kind imposed on those assisted.

       § 3 The immunity provided in item III of the caput of this article applies exclusively to non-profit legal entities that cumulatively meet
  the requirements set forth in art. 14 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code).

         § 4 The immunities of the entities provided in items I to III of the caput of this article do not apply to their acquisitions of tangible and intangible goods, including
  rights, and services.

                                                                                         Section III

                                                                    On the Moment of Occurrence of the Taxable Event

        Art. 10. The taxable event of the IBS and the CBS is deemed to occur at the moment of supply in operations with goods or services, even if of
  continuous or fractional performance.


        § 1 For purposes of the caput of this article, supply is deemed to occur at the moment:

        I - of the start of transport, in the provision of a transport service initiated in the Country;

        II - of the end of transport, in the provision of a cargo-transport service when initiated abroad;

        III - of the end of the supply, in the case of other services;

        IV - at which goods are found without valid tax documentation; and

        V - of the acquisition of goods in the hypotheses of:

        a) an auction (licitação) held by public authorities of seized or abandoned goods; or

        b) a judicial auction.

        § 2 In acquisitions of goods and services by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations, that are subject to art. 473
  of this Complementary Law, the taxable event is deemed to occur at the moment payment is made.

         § 3 In operations of continuous or fractional performance in which it is not possible to identify the moment of delivery or making available of the goods or the
  end of the supply of the service, such as those relating to water supply, basic sanitation, piped gas, telecommunications services, internet services
  and electric energy, the taxable event is deemed to occur at the moment payment becomes due.

        § 3 In operations of continuous or fractional performance, the taxable event is deemed to occur upon the first of the following occurrences:            (Wording
  given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - when the portion of the consideration corresponding to each payment becomes enforceable; or          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - payment of the obligation arising from the supply.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 4 For purposes of the caput of this article, if payment, in full or in part, occurs before the supply:

        I - on the date of payment of each installment:

        a) advance taxes will be required, calculated as follows:

        1. the tax base will correspond to the value of each installment paid;

        2. the rates will be those in force on the date of payment of each installment;

        2. the rates will be those in force and applicable to the operation on the date of issuance of the electronic tax document corresponding to the payment or on the
  date of payment, whichever occurs first; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        b) the advances under item "a" of this item will be recorded as debits in the assessment;

        II - on the date of supply:

        a) the final amounts of the taxes will be calculated as follows:

        1. the tax base will be the total value of the operation, including installments paid in advance;

        2. the rates will be those in force on the date of supply;

        b) if the amounts of the advances are lower than the final amounts, the differences will be recorded as debits in the assessment; and

        c) if the amounts of the advances are higher than the final amounts, the differences will be recorded as credits in the assessment.

        c) if the amounts of the advances are higher than the final amounts, the rules applicable to undue or excess payment will apply.          (Wording
  given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 5 In the case of § 4 of this article, if the supply to which the payment refers does not occur, including as a result of a rescission (distrato), the supplier may
  appropriate credits based on the value of the installments of the advances returned.

        § 5 In the case of § 4 of this article, if the supply to which the payment refers does not occur, including as a result of a rescission (distrato), the rules
  applicable to cancellation will apply. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 6 The extinguishment of the debits under § 4 will allow the acquirer to appropriate credits under the terms of arts. 47 to 57 of this Complementary Law.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 7 The regulation will establish hypotheses in which, observed the maximum period of 5 (five) days between the advance payment and the date of supply,
  the advances under item "a" of item I of § 4 of this article may be recorded as debits in the assessment period of the supply. (Included by the
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                      Section IV

                                                                              On the Place of the Operation

        Art. 11. The place of the operation is considered to be, for:

        I - tangible movable goods, the place of delivery or making available of the goods to the recipient;

        II - real property, intangible movable goods, including rights, related to real property, a service physically provided on real property and a service of
  administration and intermediation of real property, the place where the real property is located;

        III - a service physically provided on a natural person or enjoyed in person by a natural person, the place of provision of the service;

         IV - a service of planning, organization and administration of fairs, exhibitions, congresses, shows, exhibits and similar events, the place of the event to which
  the service refers;

        V - a service physically provided on tangible movable goods and port services, the place of provision of the service;

        VI - a passenger-transport service, the place where the transport begins;

        VII - a cargo-transport service, the place of delivery or making available of the goods to the recipient stated in the tax document;


        VIII - a service of exploitation of a route (via), through the charging of a value under any title, including tariffs, tolls and any other forms of charge, the territory
  of each Municipality and State, or of the Federal District, proportionally to the corresponding length of the route exploited;

        IX - fixed telephony service and other communication services provided by means of cables, wires, fibers and similar media, the place of installation of the terminal; and

        X - other services and other intangible movable goods, including rights, the place of the principal domicile of the:

        X - goods or a service not covered by the other items of this article:        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        a) acquirer, in onerous operations;

        a) if the operation is onerous:     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        1. the place of the principal domicile of the acquirer resident or domiciled in the Country; or      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        2. the place of the principal domicile of the recipient resident or domiciled in the Country, if the acquirer is not resident or domiciled in the Country.         (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        b) recipient, in non-onerous operations.

        b) if the operation is non-onerous, the place of the principal domicile of the recipient resident or domiciled in the Country.        (Wording given by Complementary Law
  No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1 For purposes of item I of the caput of this article:

        I - in an operation carried out remotely (não presencial), understood as one in which the delivery or making available does not occur in the presence of the acquirer or
  recipient at the establishment of the supplier, the place of delivery or making available of the goods to the recipient is considered to be the final destination indicated by the acquirer:

        a) to the supplier, if the transport service is the supplier's responsibility; or

        b) to the third party responsible for the transport, if the transport service is the acquirer's responsibility;

        II - the operation is considered to occur at the place of the principal domicile of the recipient, in the acquisition of a land, water or air motor vehicle;

        III - the operation is considered to occur at the place where the tangible movable goods are located:

        a) in the acquisition of goods in the hypotheses of:

        1. an auction (licitação) held by public authorities of seized or abandoned goods; or

        2. a judicial auction; and

        b) upon the finding of an irregularity due to the lack of tax documentation or coverage by invalid documentation.

        § 2 For purposes of item II of the caput of this article, if the real property is located in more than one Municipality, the place of the property is considered to be the
  Municipality where the largest part of its area is located.

        § 3 For purposes of this Complementary Law, the place of the principal domicile of the acquirer or, as the case may be, of the recipient is considered to be:

        I - the place stated in the registry with unique identification under art. 59 of this Complementary Law, which must take into account:

        a) for natural persons, the place of their permanent residence or, in the absence of, or in case of more than one, permanent residence, the place where their
  economic relations are most significant; and

         b) for legal persons and entities without legal personality, as applicable, the place of each establishment to which the goods or
  service is supplied;

          II - in the case of an acquirer or recipient not duly registered, whatever results from the combination of at least 2 (two) non-conflicting criteria, at
  the supplier's choice, among the following:

        a) the address declared to the supplier;

        b) the address obtained by collecting other commercially relevant information in the course of the operation;

        c) the address of the acquirer stated in the registry of the payment arrangement used for payment of the operation; and

        d) the Internet Protocol (IP) address of the device used to contract the operation or obtained by using a geolocation method;

        III - if it is not possible to comply with item II of this paragraph, the address declared to the supplier will be considered.

        § 4 In acquisitions carried out centrally by a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime who has more than one establishment and that
  are not subject to a prohibition on the appropriation of credits:

        I - the services under item IX of the caput of this article will be considered provided at the acquirer's principal domicile; and

        I - the services under item IX of the caput of this article and the leasing (locação) of tangible movable goods will be considered supplied at the principal domicile of the
  acquirer; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - for purposes of item X of the caput of this article and item I of this paragraph, the acquirer's principal domicile is considered to be the place of its
  head-office establishment.

        § 5 The provisions of item X of the caput of this article apply to the services under item III of the caput of this article that are provided remotely,
  even if only partially.

       § 6 If the tax authority finds that the information provided by the acquirer under § 3 of this article is incorrect and results in
  underpayment of the IBS and the CBS, the difference will be assessed against the acquirer, with statutory additions.

        § 7 In operations involving water supply, piped gas and electric energy, the place of the operation is considered to be:

        I - the place of delivery or making available, in operations intended for consumption;

        II - the place of the acquirer's principal establishment, defined under § 4 of this article:

       II - the place of the acquirer's principal establishment, defined under § 4 of this article, in operations that do not involve effective consumption:
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)
        a) in the supply of electric-energy transmission services; and

        b) in other operations, including in the hypotheses of generation, distribution or commercialization of electric energy.

        § 8 In the case under item X of the caput of this article, if the acquirer is resident or domiciled abroad and the recipient is resident or
  domiciled in the Country, the recipient's domicile is considered the place of the operation.  (Revoked by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 8 (Revoked).      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 9 In acquisitions of electric energy carried out on a multilateral basis, the place of the operation is considered to be that of the establishment or domicile of the
  agent that is in a debtor position in the energy balance.

        § 9 In acquisitions of electric energy carried out on a multilateral basis, the place of the operation is considered to be that of the establishment of the agent or of its
  represented parties that are in the debtor position of the financial settlement determined by the Electric Energy Trading Chamber (Câmara de Comercialização de
  Energia Elétrica). (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 10. In pipeline-transport operations of natural gas, the place of the operation will be that of the principal establishment of the:

        I - supplier, in the contracting of natural-gas entry capacity of the pipeline, under applicable legislation; and

        II - acquirer, in the contracting of natural-gas exit capacity from the pipeline.

        § 11. The provisions of item X of the caput of this article apply to operations involving the assignment of space for the provision of advertising services.

                                                                                      Section V

                                                                                 On the Tax Base

         Art. 12. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS is the value of the operation, except as otherwise provided in this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The value of the operation comprises the entire amount charged by the supplier under any title, including amounts corresponding to:

        I - increases arising from adjustments to the value of the operation;

        II - interest, penalties, additions and charges;

        III - discounts granted subject to a condition;

        IV - the value of transport charged as part of the value of the operation, in transport performed by the supplier itself or by transport on its behalf;

        V - taxes and public prices, including tariffs, levied on the operation or borne by the supplier, except those provided in § 2 of this article; and

        VI - other amounts charged or received as part of the value of the operation, including insurance and fees.

        § 2 The following are not included in the tax base of the IBS and the CBS:

        I - the amount of the IBS and the CBS levied on the operation;

        II - the amount of the Tax on Industrialized Products (IPI);

        III - unconditional discounts;

       IV - reimbursements received for amounts paid relating to operations on behalf of or in the name of third parties, provided that the
  tax documentation relating to such operations is issued in the name of the third party; and

         V - the amount levied on the operation of the taxes referred to in item II of the caput of art. 155, item III of the caput of art. 156 and item "b" of item I and
  item IV of the caput of art. 195 of the Federal Constitution, and of the Contribution to the Social Integration Programs and the Public Servant Asset Formation Program
  (Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep) referred to in art. 239 of the Federal Constitution, from January 1, 2026 to December 31, 2032;

        VI - the contribution provided in art. 149-A of the Federal Constitution.

         § 3 For purposes of item III of § 2 of this article, an unconditional discount is considered to be the portion reducing the price of the operation that appears on the
  respective tax document and does not depend on a subsequent event, including if granted through a loyalty program provided on a non-onerous basis by the
  supplier itself.

         § 4 The tax base will correspond to the market value of the goods or services, understood as the value practiced in comparable operations between unrelated
  parties, in the following hypotheses:

        I - absence of the value of the operation;

        II - an operation with no determined value;

        III - a value of the operation not represented in money; and

        IV - an operation between related parties, under item IV of the caput of art. 5, observed §§ 2 to 7 thereof.

        § 5 If the value of the operation is expressed in foreign currency, it will be converted into national currency at an exchange rate determined by the Central
  Bank of Brazil, in accordance with the regulation.

        § 6 If the taxpayer contracts derivative financial instruments outside market conditions and that conceal, partially or fully, the value of the
  operation, the gain on the derivative will make up the tax base of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 7 The tax base relating to a return or cancellation will be the same as that used in the original operation.

        § 8 In international passenger transport, if outbound and return legs are sold together, the tax base will be half the value charged.

       § 9 In acquisitions of electric energy carried out on a multilateral basis, the tax base is the value of the financial settlement determined by the Electric Energy
  Trading Chamber, observed the proportional participation of the establishments of the agent or of its
  represented parties.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 13. The value of the operation will be assessed (arbitrado) by the tax administration when:

        I - the elements necessary to prove the value of the operation are not presented to the tax authorities upon inspection, including under an allegation of loss,
  misplacement, disappearance or accident, in cases in which:


        a) the operation is carried out without issuance of a tax document or is covered by invalid documentation; or

        b) a value notoriously lower than the market value of the operation is declared in the tax document;

         II - in any other hypothesis in which the declarations, information or documents presented by the taxable person or by a third party legally obligated
  are omitted, conflicting or unreliable.

        Sole paragraph. For purposes of the assessment (arbitramento) under this article, the tax base of the IBS and the CBS will be:

        I - the market value of the goods or services supplied, understood as the value practiced in comparable operations between unrelated parties; or

        II - when the value under item I of this paragraph is not available, that calculated:

       a) based on the cost of the goods or service, plus the expenses indispensable to the maintenance of the taxable person's activities or the gross profit determined
  based on accounting or tax records; or

        b) by the value fixed by a competent body, by the final consumer price suggested by the manufacturer or importer or by the price published or provided by
  entities representing the respective sectors, as the case may be.

                                                                                       Section VI

                                                                                   On Rates

                                                                                      Subsection I

                                                                               On Standard Rates

        Art. 14. The rates of the CBS and the IBS will be set by specific law of the respective federative entity, as follows:

        I - the Union will set the CBS rate;

        II - each State will set its IBS rate;

        III - each Municipality will set its IBS rate; and

        IV - the Federal District will exercise the state and municipal competences in setting its rates.

        § 1 For purposes of item III of the caput of this article, the State of Pernambuco will exercise the municipal competence relating to operations carried out
  in the Fernando de Noronha State District, under art. 15 of the Act of Transitional Constitutional Provisions (ADCT).

        § 2 When setting its rate, each federative entity may:

        I - link it to the reference rate of the respective federative sphere, under art. 18 of this Complementary Law, by means of an increase or decrease in
  percentage points; or

        II - set it without linkage to the reference rate of the respective federative sphere.

        § 3 In the absence of a specific law establishing the federative entity's rate, the reference rate of the respective federative sphere will apply.

        § 4 References in this Complementary Law to standard rates must be understood as references to the rates set by each federative entity under the
  terms of this article.

        Art. 15. The IBS rate levied on each operation will correspond to:

        I - the sum:

        a) of the rate of the destination State of the operation; and

        b) of the rate of the destination Municipality of the operation; or

        II - the rate of the Federal District, when it is the destination of the operation.

       Sole paragraph. For purposes of this article, the destination of the operation is the place where the operation occurs, defined under art. 11 of this Complementary
  Law.

         Art. 16. The rate set by each federative entity under art. 14 of this Complementary Law will be the same for all operations with goods or with
  services, except as provided in the hypotheses in this Complementary Law.

        Sole paragraph. Rate reductions established under the differentiated regimes covered by Title IV of this Book will be applied to the rate of
  each federative entity.

        Sole paragraph. Rate reductions established under the differentiated and specific regimes covered by Titles IV and V of this Book will be
  applied to the rate of each federative entity, except in cases where a nationally uniform rate applies. (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 17. The rate applied for purposes of a return or cancellation of the operation will be the same as that charged in the original operation.

                                                                                      Subsection II

                                                                            On Reference Rates

         Art. 18. Reference rates will be set by resolution of the Federal Senate:

        I - for the CBS, from 2027 to 2035, under arts. 353 to 359, 366, 368 and 369 of this Complementary Law;

        II - for the IBS, from 2029 to 2035, under arts. 361 to 366 and 369 of this Complementary Law;

        III - for the IBS and the CBS, after 2035, those in force in the previous year.

        Art. 19. Any change in federal legislation that reduces or increases the collection of the IBS or the CBS:

        I - must be offset by an increase or reduction, by the Federal Senate, of the CBS reference rate and of the state and
  municipal IBS reference rates, so as to preserve the revenue collection of the federative spheres;

        II - will only take effect with the start of the production of effects of the adjustment of the reference rates under item I of this caput.
        § 1 For purposes of the caput of this article:

        I - any change in federal legislation that reduces or increases the collection of the IBS or the CBS must be taken into account, including, among others:

        a) changes to the criteria relating to the general refund of IBS and CBS to natural persons, covered by Chapter I of Title III of this Book;

        b) changes to the differentiated, specific or favored taxation regimes provided in this Complementary Law, including as a result of the five-year
  review under Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law; and

       c) changes to the favored taxation regime of the Unified Special Regime for the Collection of Taxes and Contributions owed by Microenterprises and
  Small Businesses (Simples Nacional) and of the Individual Micro-Entrepreneur (MEI), covered by Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006;

        II - the following will not be taken into account:

        a) changes to the CBS rate, under item I of the caput and § 2 of art. 14 of this Complementary Law; and

        b) changes to the amount of the specific CBS refund to natural persons under federal legislation, covered by Chapter I of Title III of this Book;

        III - the adjustment of the reference rates must be established by resolution of the Federal Senate, based on calculations prepared by the IBS Management
  Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union and approved by the Federal Court of Accounts (Tribunal de Contas da União), observed the ninety-day advance-notice rule (anterioridade nonagesimal) provided
  in item "c" of item III of the caput of art. 150 of the Federal Constitution and, for the IBS, also the annual advance-notice rule (anterioridade anual) provided in item "b" of item III of the
  caput of art. 150 of the Federal Constitution.

        § 2 For purposes of item III of § 1 of this article:

       I - the calculations must be sent to the Federal Court of Accounts, accompanied by the respective methodology, within 60 (sixty)
  days after the promulgation of the law that reduces or increases the collection of the IBS or the CBS:

        a) by the IBS Management Committee, in the case of legal changes that affect only IBS revenue;

        b) by the Executive Branch of the Union, in the case of legal changes that affect only CBS revenue; or

        c) jointly by the IBS Management Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union, in the case of legal changes that affect both IBS and CBS revenue;

        II - the Federal Court of Accounts may request adjustments to the methodology or the calculations, within 60 (sixty) days after receiving them;

        III - the IBS Management Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union will have up to 30 (thirty) days to adjust the methodology or the calculations;

        IV - the Federal Court of Accounts will decide definitively with respect to the calculations and will forward them to the Federal Senate, within 30 (thirty) days; and

        V - the Federal Senate will establish the adjustment of the reference rates, within 30 (thirty) days.

       Art. 20. Complementary bill proposals that reduce or increase the collection of the IBS or the CBS, under art. 19, will only be considered by the
  National Congress if accompanied by an estimate of the impact on the reference rates of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 1 The impact estimate under the caput of this article, accompanied by the respective methodology, will be prepared:

        I - by the Executive Branch of the Union, for bills of its own initiative, with a statement from the IBS Management Committee within up to 30 (thirty) days; or

       II - by the author and the rapporteur of the bill before the body responsible for issuing an opinion on the financial and budgetary aspects of the bill, in the
  other cases.

        § 2 For purposes of item II of § 1 of this article, the Chamber of Deputies, the Federal Senate, or any of their Committees, may consult the
  Executive Branch of the Union, the IBS Management Committee or the Federal Court of Accounts, which must present the impact estimate within 60 (sixty)
  days.

                                                                                     Section VII

                                                                               On Tax Liability

        Art. 21. The following are taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS:

        I - the supplier that carries out operations:

        a) in the development of an economic activity;

        b) on a habitual basis or in a volume that characterizes an economic activity; or

        c) on a professional basis, even if the profession is not regulated;

        II - the acquirer, even if not covered by item I of this caput, in the acquisition of goods:

        a) seized or abandoned, in an auction (licitação) held by public authorities; or

        b) at a judicial auction;

        III - the importer;

        IV - the person expressly provided for in other hypotheses in this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The taxpayer under the caput of this article is required to register in the records relating to the IBS and the CBS.

         § 2 A supplier resident or domiciled abroad is required to register as a taxpayer if it carries out operations in the Country or as a tax
  liable party in the case of imports, observed the definition of the place of the operation provided in art. 11 and the provisions of art. 23 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3 The regulation may also require registration in the records relating to the IBS and the CBS of the parties responsible for compliance with principal or
  ancillary obligations provided in this Complementary Law.

         § 4 In the importation of tangible goods, the provisions of § 2 of this article apply only to international shipments subject to a simplified taxation regime
  under art. 95.

         Art. 22. Digital platforms, even if domiciled abroad, are liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS relating to the transactions and imports
  carried out through their intermediation, in the following cases:

        I - jointly and severally with the acquirer or recipient and in substitution for the supplier, should the latter be resident or domiciled abroad; and


        II - jointly and severally with the supplier, should the latter:

        II - jointly and severally with the supplier resident and domiciled in the Country, should:      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) be resident or domiciled in the Country;

        a) the digital platform not provide the information set forth in § 5 of this article; or     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) be a taxpayer, even if not registered under the terms of § 1 of art. 21 of this Complementary Law; and

        b) the supplier:        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        1. be a taxpayer, even if not registered under the terms of § 1 of art. 21 of this Complementary Law; and       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        2. not issue an electronic tax document for the value of the transaction carried out through the platform.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        c) not register the transaction in an electronic tax document.

        § 1 A digital platform is considered to be one that:

        I - acts as an intermediary between suppliers and acquirers in transactions and imports carried out on a non face-to-face basis or electronically; and

        II - controls one or more of the following elements essential to the transaction:

        a) charging/billing;

        b) payment;

        c) definition of terms and conditions; or

        d) delivery.

        § 2 A platform that carries out only one of the following activities is not considered a digital platform:

        I - provision of internet access;

        II - payment services provided by institutions authorized to operate by the Central Bank of Brazil;

        III - advertising; or

        IV - search for or comparison of suppliers, provided it does not charge for the service based on sales made.

         § 3 In the case dealt with in item I of the caput of this article, the supplier resident or domiciled abroad is exempted from the registration referred to in § 2
  of art. 21 of this Complementary Law if it carries out transactions exclusively through a digital platform registered in the IBS and CBS registry under the regular regime.

         § 4 For purposes of applying the provision of item II of the caput of this article, it is incumbent upon the IBS Management Committee and the Special Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of
  Brazil (RFB) to inform the digital platform of the taxpayer status of the supplier resident or domiciled in the Country who is not registered in the registry.

       § 5 The digital platform shall submit to the IBS Management Committee and to the RFB, in the manner set forth in the regulations, information on the transactions and imports involving goods or
  services carried out through its intermediation, including identifying the supplier, even if it is not a taxpayer.

        § 6 In the case in which the payment process for the transaction or import is initiated by the digital platform, it shall submit the information
  necessary for the segregation and collection of the IBS and CBS amounts owed by the supplier at the financial settlement of the transaction (split payment), when
  available, including under the simplified procedure, under the terms of arts. 31 to 35 of this Complementary Law.

        § 7 A digital platform that complies with §§ 5 and 6 of this article shall not be liable for payment of any differences between the amounts of
  IBS and CBS collected and those owed on the transaction by the supplier resident or domiciled in the Country.

        § 7 The digital platform shall not be liable for payment of any differences between the amounts of IBS and CBS collected and those owed on the
  transaction by the supplier resident and domiciled in the Country if: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         I - it is possible to carry out the split payment at the financial settlement of the transaction and the digital platform submits the information referred to in § 6 of this
  article; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the digital platform submits the information referred to in § 5 of this article.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 8 In the case in which the supplier is resident or domiciled in the Country and the payment process for the transaction is not initiated by the digital platform,
  the platform shall not be tax liable if it complies with § 5 and the supplier issues an electronic tax document for the value of the transaction carried out through the
  platform.    (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8 (Repealed).        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 9 The provision of § 8 also applies if the payment process for the transaction is initiated by the digital platform and the split
  payment is not carried out. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 9 (Repealed).        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 10. In the cases in which the digital platform is liable, under the terms of items I and II of the caput of this article:

         I - the platform shall be jointly and severally liable for the IBS and CBS debts of the supplier relating to the transaction, in accordance with the tax rules
  applicable to it, if the supplier is resident or domiciled in the Country and is registered as a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS, under the regular regime or a favored regime; and

        II - in other cases, the IBS and CBS debts shall be calculated under the rules of the regular regime, including as to rates, differentiated regimes and
  specific regimes applicable to the goods and services.

         § 11. The digital platform shall not be tax liable in relation to transactions in which it does not control any of the essential elements, under the terms of
  item II of § 1 of this article.

        § 12. The digital platform may opt, with the consent of the supplier resident or domiciled in the Country, subject to the criteria established in the regulations:

        I - to issue electronic tax documents on behalf of the supplier, including on a consolidated basis; and

        II - to pay the IBS and the CBS, based on the value and other information of the transaction intermediated by the platform, with the supplier's obligation
  maintained in relation to any differences.


        § 13. The digital platform may opt, with the consent of the supplier, in the manner established in the regulations, to be a tax substitute in relation to the
  transactions it intermediates for a supplier resident or domiciled in the Country, in which case it shall: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       I - issue electronic tax documents relating to the transactions of the substituted supplier, including on a consolidated basis;                   (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

         II - assess the IBS and the CBS arising from the said transactions in accordance with the provisions of items I or II of § 10 of this article, as applicable; and
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - pay the IBS and the CBS based on the value and other information of the transaction intermediated by the platform, with the supplier's obligation
  maintained in relation to any differences. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 14. In the case referred to in item "b" of item II of the caput of this article, if the platform issues the tax document within 30 (thirty) days counted from the date
  on which the supplier should have issued it and pays the IBS and the CBS as set forth in the regulations, based on the value and other information of the transaction
  intermediated by it, the surcharges referred to in § 2 of art. 29 of this Complementary Law and the penalty for failure to issue the tax document shall be required
  exclusively from the supplier.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 15. In the cases of §§ 12, 13 and 14 of this article, the digital platform is authorized to calculate the IBS and CBS debits at the reference rates
  in the event of unavailability of information regarding the tax rules applicable to the supplier, and any difference in the IBS and CBS owed on the transaction
  shall be:   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - paid by the supplier, if the applicable rates are higher than the reference rates; or            (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          II - refunded if the applicable rates are lower than the reference rates.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 23. The digital platform, including one domiciled abroad, shall register in the IBS and CBS registry under the regular regime for purposes of compliance
  with the provisions of art. 22.

        Sole paragraph. If the supplier or the digital platform resident or domiciled abroad does not register in the IBS and CBS registry under the regular
  regime referred to in the caput of this article:

        I - the IBS and the CBS shall be segregated and collected, at the reference rates, on remittances to the supplier or the platform, by the institution that carries out the
  exchange transaction, subject to the criteria established in the regulations; and

          II - any difference in the IBS and CBS owed on the transaction or import shall be:

          a) paid by the acquirer or importer, if the applicable rates are higher than the reference rates; or

          b) refunded to the acquirer or importer, if the applicable rates are lower than the reference rates.

         Art. 24. Without prejudice to the other cases provided for in Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code) and in civil legislation, jointly and severally
  liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS are:

         I - the person or entity without legal personality that, under any title, acquires, imports, receives, causes the entry or exit of, or holds in deposit, goods, or takes
  a service, not covered by a valid tax document;

          II - the carrier, including a postal service or express delivery company:

          a) in relation to goods transported without a valid tax document;

          b) when it delivers goods to a location other than that indicated on the tax document;

          III - the auctioneer, for the IBS and the CBS owed on the transaction carried out at auction;

        IV - the developers or suppliers of programs or applications used to record transactions with goods or services that contain functions
  or commands inserted for the purpose of failing to comply with tax legislation;

        V - any individual, legal entity or entity without legal personality that contributes, through its acts and omissions, to the failure to comply with
  tax obligations, by means of:

          a) concealment of the occurrence or value of the transaction; or

          b) abuse of legal personality, characterized by deviation of purpose or commingling of assets; and

          VI - the bonded warehouse, the customs area or an establishment equivalent to it, the depositary or the customs broker, in relation to the goods:

          a) intended for export without corresponding tax documentation;

          b) received for export and not exported;

          c) intended for a person or entity without legal personality different from the one that imported or acquired it at auction; or

          d) imported and delivered without due authorization from the competent tax administrations.

        § 1 The immunity referred to in § 1 of art. 9 of this Complementary Law does not exempt the public company providing postal services from joint and several liability
  in the cases provided for in item II of the caput of this article.

          § 2 The liability referred to in item "a" of item V of the caput of this article is limited to the concealed value of the transaction.

         § 3 The mere existence of an economic group, in the absence of any action or omission that falls within the provisions
  of item V of the caput of this article, does not give rise to joint and several liability.

       § 4 Re-refiners or collectors authorized by the National Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels Agency (ANP) are jointly and severally liable for
  payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on the acquisition of used or contaminated lubricating oil from a taxpayer subject to the regular regime.

        § 5 In the case of § 4, the issuance of the electronic tax document relating to the transaction shall be carried out by the re-refiners or collectors, in the manner established
  in the regulations, which may provide, including, that the issuance occur periodically, encompassing the transactions carried out in the period.

         Art. 25. The liabilities referred to in this Complementary Law comprise the obligation for payment of the IBS and the CBS, plus monetary correction and
  adjustment, late-payment penalty, punitive fines and other charges.

          Art. 26. The following are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS, except as provided in item II of § 1 of art. 156-A of the Federal Constitution:

          I - condominium (edilícia - building condominium);
        II - consortium referred to in art. 278 of Law No. 6,404, of December 15, 1976;

        III - a silent partnership (sociedade em conta de participação);

       IV - nanoentrepreneur, understood as the individual who has earned gross revenue lower than 50% (fifty percent) of the limit established for
  joining the MEI (Individual Microentrepreneur) regime provided for in § 1 of art. 18-A, also observing the provisions of §§ 4 and 4-B of the said article of Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14,
  2006, and who has not joined that regime; and

        V - (VETOED);
        V - investment funds, subject to the provisions of §§ 5 to 8 of this article; (Promulgation of vetoed parts)

        V - investment funds, subject to the provisions of §§ 5-A to 8-A of this article;        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        VI - rural producer referred to in art. 164 of this Complementary Law;

        VII - self-employed cargo carrier referred to in art. 169 of this Complementary Law;

        VIII - an entity or unit of an economic-accounting nature, non-profit, that provides health care plan services under the self-management modality;

        IX - closed supplementary pension entities, established in accordance with Complementary Law No. 109, of May 29, 2001; and

        X - (VETOED).

        X - endowment funds established under the terms of Law No. 13,800, of January 4, 2019.     (Promulgation of vetoed parts)

        § 1 The following may opt for the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, subject to the provisions of § 6 of art. 41 of this Complementary Law:

        I - the entities without legal personality referred to in items I to III of the caput of this article;

        II - the individual referred to in item IV of the caput of this article; and

        III - (VETOED);

        IV - the rural producer referred to in item VI of the caput of this article, in the manner set forth in art. 165 of this Complementary Law; and

        V - the self-employed cargo carrier referred to in item VII of the caput of this article.

        § 2 In relation to the building condominium referred to in item I of the caput of this article:

       I - if it exercises the option for the regular regime referred to in § 1 of this article, the IBS and the CBS shall be levied on all fees and other amounts charged by the
  condominium to its unit owners and to third parties; and

       I - if it exercises the option for the regular regime, under the terms of § 1 of this article, the IBS and the CBS shall be levied on all fees and other amounts charged by the
  condominium to its unit owners and to third parties; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - if it does not exercise the option for the regular regime and provided that the fees and other condominium amounts charged to its unit owners represent less than
  80% (eighty percent) of the condominium's total revenue:

        a) it shall be subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS on the transactions with goods and services that it carries out in accordance with the provisions of item I of the caput of art.
  21 of this Complementary Law; and

       b) it shall appropriate credits in proportion to the revenue arising from the transactions taxed in the manner of item "a" of this item, in relation to the total revenue of the
  condominium.

        § 3 If the consortium referred to in item II of the caput does not exercise the option for the regular regime referred to in § 1 of this article, the members of the consortium shall
  be liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS regarding the transactions carried out by the consortium, in proportion to their respective interests.

         § 4 If the silent partnership referred to in item III of the caput does not exercise the option for the regular regime referred to in § 1 of this article, the
  managing partner shall be liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS regarding the transactions carried out by the partnership, with the exclusion of amounts owed to silent
  partners being prohibited.

        § 5 (VETOED).

        § 5-A. For purposes of the provisions of item V of the caput of this article, the following are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - Real Estate Investment Funds (FII) and Agribusiness Production Chain Investment Funds (Fiagro), referred to in Law No. 8,668, of
  June 25, 1993, that carry out transactions with real property, including transactions with real rights over real property, and that, cumulatively: (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         a) have their units admitted to trading exclusively on stock exchanges or organized over-the-counter markets and have at least 100 (one hundred)
  unit holders; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) do not have:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        1. an individual unit holder holding units that represent 20% (twenty percent) or more of the total units issued by the FII or the Fiagro, or whose units
  entitle it to receive income greater than 20% (twenty percent) of total income; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

        2. a group of related individual unit holders, understood as relatives up to the second degree, holding units that represent 40% (forty
  percent) or more of the total units issued by the FII or the Fiagro, or whose units entitle them to receive income greater than 40%
  (forty percent) of the total income earned by the fund; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        3. legal entity unit holders that, individually or together with unit holders that are their controlling shareholders or their subsidiaries and affiliates, hold
  more than 50% (fifty percent) of the units of the fund, except when the unit holder is a closed pension entity;   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

         II - the FII and the Fiagro that carry out transactions with real property, including transactions with real rights over real property, and that do not meet the
  conditions established in item I of this paragraph, whose units are held, directly or indirectly, in more than 95% (ninety-five percent), by:
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) a FII or Fiagro that meets the provisions of item I of this paragraph; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) an investment fund established in the Country exclusively to receive resources from supplementary pension benefit plans and from
  personal insurance plans, regulated and supervised by the competent governmental bodies; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
       c) pension entities and pension funds in the Country, regulated and supervised by the competent governmental bodies; or                   (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        d) an investment fund that, although not established as a FII or Fiagro, meets the requirements set forth in items "a" and "b" of item I of this paragraph;
  and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - other investment funds whose assets consist exclusively of investments in equity interests, certificates, rights,
  securities and other financial assets permitted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (CVM), subject to the provisions of § 6-A and § 8-A of this article.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 5-B. Temporary possession by the investment fund of assets obtained as a result of judicial or extrajudicial proceedings relating to the recovery of assets forming part of its
  portfolio does not undermine compliance with the requirements referred to in the items of § 5-A of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

        § 6 (VETOED).

        § 6-A. The following are taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime:        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       I - the FII and the Fiagro that carry out transactions with real property, including transactions with real rights over real property, that:                 (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) do not meet the conditions established in item I or item II of § 5-A of this article; or         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) are subject to the taxation applicable to legal entities, under the terms of the legislation in force; and       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - Receivables Investment Funds (FIDC) and other investment funds that prepay receivables, not
  characterized as investment entities, under the terms provided for in art. 193, § 5, or art. 219, § 6, both of this Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7 The following are taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime: investment funds that prepay receivables, under the terms provided for in art.
  193 or art. 219 of this Complementary Law. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7 (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7-A. The FII and the Fiagro referred to in items I and II of § 5-A of this article may opt, at any time, irrevocably, for the regular regime
  of the IBS and the CBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8 (VETOED).

         § 8-A. If, after the date of publication of this Complementary Law, it becomes permitted, in accordance with regulations to be issued by the
  governmental bodies that make up the National Financial System, for new transactions with goods or services subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS
  to be carried out by an investment fund, that fund shall be considered a taxpayer under the regular regime. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 9 The entities and units of an economic-accounting nature referred to in items VIII and IX of the caput of this article shall be taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS if
  they fail to meet the requirements set forth in art. 14 of the National Tax Code.

        § 9-A. In the case in which investment funds are taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime, when the unit holder is subject to taxation
  under the specific regime for financial services, under the terms of Chapter II of Title V of this Book, the portion of the income received by the unit holder
  corresponding to the transactions taxed at the fund level shall not be included in the tax base of the specific regime for financial services.               (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 10. For purposes of classification as a nanoentrepreneur, under the terms of item IV of the caput of this article, the gross revenue of the individual
  providing private individual passenger transport services or goods delivery services intermediated by digital platforms shall be considered to be 25% (twenty-five percent)
  of the gross monthly amount received.

         § 10. For purposes of classification as a nanoentrepreneur under the terms of item IV of the caput of this article, the gross revenue of the individual
  providing private individual passenger transport services or goods delivery, including in the case in which there is intermediation by
  digital platforms, shall be considered to be 25% (twenty-five percent) of the gross monthly amount received. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 11. The regulations may establish simplified ancillary obligations for the persons and entities without legal personality and the units of an
  economic-accounting nature referred to in this article.

                                                                                     Section VIII

                                                                   On the Methods of Extinguishing Debts

                                                                                    Subsection I

                                                                               General Provisions

        Art. 27. Debts of the IBS and the CBS arising from the levy on transactions with goods or services shall be extinguished by the following methods:

        I - offset with credits, respectively, of IBS and CBS appropriated by the taxpayer, under the terms of arts. 47 to 56 and the other provisions of this
  Complementary Law;

        II - payment by the taxpayer;

        III - collection at the financial settlement of the transaction (split payment), under the terms of arts. 31 to 35 of this Complementary Law;

        IV - collection by the acquirer, under the terms of art. 36 of this Complementary Law; or

        V - payment by the party to which this Complementary Law assigns liability.

        Sole paragraph. The extinction of debts referred to in the caput of this article:

         I - in the cases of items I and II of the caput of this article, shall be applied to the amounts of unextinguished debts of the IBS and the CBS levied on transactions
  occurring in the assessment period in chronological order of the tax document, according to criteria established in the regulations;

        II - in the cases of items III and IV of the caput of this article, shall be linked to the respective transaction; and

        III - in the case of item V of the caput of this article, shall be linked to the specific transaction to which it refers or, if it does not refer to a specific transaction, shall be
  applied in the manner of item I of this paragraph.

         Art. 28. In transactions with electric energy or with rights related to it, collection of the IBS and the CBS relating to generation, commercialization and
  distribution and transmission shall be carried out exclusively:
         I - by the electric energy distributor, if the sale is made to an acquirer served in the regulated contracting environment;
         II - by the seller of electric energy, in the case of acquisition in the free contracting environment of energy for the acquirer's own consumption or when the
  acquirer is not subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS;
         III - by the acquirer, in the capacity of liable party, of electric energy if intended for consumption in the acquisition of electric energy carried out in a
  multilateral manner; or
         IV - by the electric energy transmitter, in the provision of electric energy transmission service to a consumer connected directly to the basic
  transmission network.

       Art. 28. In transactions with electric energy or with rights related to it, collection of the IBS and the CBS relating to import, generation,
  commercialization, distribution and transmission shall be carried out exclusively: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - by the electric energy distributor, in cases of supply to an acquirer served in the regulated contracting environment or of charging for the
  use of distribution systems for consumers served in the free contracting environment; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         II - by the seller, in the case of acquisition in the free contracting environment of energy for the acquirer's own consumption or when the acquirer is not
  subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - in the case of acquisition for consumption, carried out in a multilateral manner:      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) by the retail trader, in relation to the consumption of the represented consuming units; or              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          b) in other cases, by the consuming establishment;         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       IV - by the electric energy transmitter, in the provision of electric energy transmission service and of connection to the transmission system to a
  consumer connected directly to the basic transmission network. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 1 Collection of the IBS and the CBS levied on transactions with electric energy, or with rights related to it, relating to generation, commercialization,
  distribution and transmission shall occur only upon supply:

       § 1 Collection of the IBS and the CBS levied on transactions with electric energy, or with rights related to it, relating to import, generation,
  commercialization, distribution and transmission shall occur only upon supply: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - for consumption; or

          II - to a taxpayer not subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS.

         § 2 In the electric energy transmission service, the supply is deemed to have occurred at the moment when payment relating to the transmission
  service becomes due, under the terms of the applicable legislation.

        § 2 In the electric energy transmission service and connection to transmission systems, the supply is deemed to have occurred at the moment defined
  under the terms of § 3 of art. 10 of this Complementary Law. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3 Excluded from the tax base of the CBS and the IBS is the electric energy supplied by the distributor to the consuming unit, in the quantity corresponding to the
  energy injected into the distribution grid by that same consuming unit, plus the electric energy credits originated by the same consuming unit in the
  same month, in prior months, or in another consuming unit of the same holder.

          § 4 The exclusion referred to in § 3 of this article:

          I - applies only to consumers participating in the Electric Energy Compensation System, referred to in Law No. 14,300, of January 6, 2022;

         II - applies only to the offsetting of electric energy produced by microgeneration and minigeneration, whose installed capacity is, respectively, less than or
  equal to 75 kW and greater than 75 kW and less than or equal to 1 MW; and

       III - does not apply to the availability cost, reactive energy, power demand, connection charges or use of the distribution system, non-energy-related
  tariff components, and any other amounts charged by the distributor.

                                                                                      Subsection II

                                                                          On Payment by the Taxpayer

          Art. 29. The taxpayer shall, by the due date, make payment of the balance payable referred to in art. 45 of this Complementary Law.

         § 1 If the payment made by the taxpayer is greater than the balance payable, the excess portion, up to the amount of the debts of the assessment period
  that have been extinguished by the methods provided for in items III to V of the caput of art. 27 of this Complementary Law between the end of the assessment period and
  the business day preceding the taxpayer's payment, shall be transferred to the taxpayer within 3 (three) business days.

        § 1 If the payment made by the taxpayer is greater than the balance payable, the excess portion, up to the amount of the debts of the assessment
  period that have been extinguished by the methods provided for in items III to V of the caput of art. 27 of this Complementary Law between the end of the
  assessment period and the processing of the payment made by the taxpayer, shall be transferred to the taxpayer within 3 (three) business days.   (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2 Payment made after the due date shall be increased by:

          I - a late-payment penalty, calculated at a rate of 0.33% (thirty-three hundredths percent) per day of delay; and

        II - late-payment interest, calculated at the reference rate of the Special Settlement and Custody System (Selic), from the first day of the month following the
  due date of the term until the month prior to that of payment, plus 1% (one percent) in the month of payment.

       § 3 The penalty referred to in item I of § 2 of this article shall be calculated from the first day following the due date of the term set for
  payment of the tax until the day on which payment occurs.

          § 4 The percentage of the penalty referred to in item I of § 2 of this article is limited to 20% (twenty percent).

        § 5 Late-payment interest, under the terms of item II of § 2 of this article, applies to unpaid punitive fines.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

       Art. 30. The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may offer, as an option to the taxpayer, an automated payment mechanism, respectively, for the IBS and
  the CBS.

          § 1 Use of the mechanism provided for in the caput of this article by the taxpayer is conditioned on prior authorization by the taxpayer.

          § 2 The automated mechanism referred to in the caput of this article shall permit the withdrawal and deposit of amounts in deposit accounts and payment accounts
  held by the taxpayer.


                                                                                  Subsection III

                                                        On Collection at Financial Settlement (Split Payment)

        Art. 31. In payment transactions relating to transactions with goods or services, providers of electronic payment services and institutions
  operating payment systems shall segregate and collect, to the IBS Management Committee and the RFB, at the time of financial settlement of the transaction (split
  payment), the amounts of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection.

        § 1 The split payment procedures provided for in this Subsection shall comprise the linking between:
        I - the electronic tax documents relating to transactions with goods or services; and
        II - the payment transaction of the respective transactions.

        § 1 The split payment procedures provided for in this Subsection comprise:             (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - the standard procedure, referred to in art. 32 of this Complementary Law; and      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the simplified procedure, referred to in art. 33 of this Complementary Law.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1-A. For purposes of the provisions of this Subsection, the following definitions apply:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - originator of the payment transaction: the party that initiates the transaction with the payment arrangement, which may be the payer or the receiver of the
  funds; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - payment transactions initiated by the receiver: those originated by means of an instruction or instrument issued by the receiver of the funds, which
  defines the payment amount, with the payer being responsible only for making the payment, even if partial; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - payment transactions initiated by the payer: those originated by the payer, who defines the payment amount, without prior intervention by the
  receiver of the funds with the payment arrangement. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 2 Joint acts of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB shall regulate the provisions of this Subsection, including as to the duties of the providers of
  electronic payment services and the institutions operating payment systems, considering the characteristics of each payment arrangement and of the
  transactions with goods and services.

         § 3 The provisions of this Subsection apply to all providers of electronic payment services referred to in the caput of this article, participants in
  payment arrangements, open and closed, public and private, including participants and arrangements not subject to regulation by the Central Bank of Brazil.

        Art. 32. The standard split payment procedure shall comply with the provisions of this article.

        § 1 The supplier is required to include in the electronic tax document information that allows for:
        I - the linking of the transactions with the payment transaction; and
        II - the identification of the amounts of the IBS and CBS debits levied on the transactions.

        § 1 The originator of the payment transaction shall transmit to the payment service provider information that allows for:                (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - the linking of the transactions with the payment transaction; and        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the identification of the amounts of the IBS and the CBS levied on the transactions.      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2 The information provided for in § 1 of this article shall be transmitted to the payment service providers:

       § 2 The information provided for in § 1 of this article shall be transmitted to the payment service providers:                    (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - by the supplier;

        I - by the supplier or by the acquirer, in cases in which they initiate the payment transaction;         (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - by the digital platform, in relation to the transactions and imports carried out through its intermediation, under the terms of art. 22 of this Complementary Law; or

        III - by another person or entity without legal personality that receives the payment.

       III - by another person or entity without legal personality, in cases in which they initiate the payment transaction.                     (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2-A. In payment transactions initiated by the receiver, the receiver may opt not to transmit to the payment service provider the information
  referred to in item I of § 1 of this article, in which case the supplier or the digital platform shall include in the electronic tax document information that
  allows for the linking of the transaction with the payment transaction. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3 Before making funds available to the supplier, the payment service provider or the institution operating the payment system shall,
  based on the information received, consult the system of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB regarding the amounts to be segregated and collected, which shall correspond to the
  positive difference between:

        I - the amounts of the IBS and CBS debits levied on the transaction, shown separately in the electronic tax document; and

        II - the portions of the debits referred to in item I of this paragraph already extinguished by any of the methods provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law.

        § 4 If the query cannot be carried out under the terms of § 3 of this article, the following procedure shall be adopted:

        I - the payment service provider or the institution operating the payment system shall segregate and collect, to the IBS Management Committee and the RFB, the amount
  of the IBS and CBS debits levied on the transactions linked to the payment transaction, based on the information received; and

        II - the IBS Management Committee and the RFB:

        a) shall calculate the amounts of the IBS and CBS debits of the transactions linked to the payment transaction, with the deduction of the portions already extinguished
  by any of the methods provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law; and

        b) shall transfer to the supplier, within 3 (three) business days, the amounts received that exceed the amount referred to in item "a" of this item.

       Art. 33. The taxpayer may opt for the simplified split payment procedure for all transactions in which the acquirer is not a taxpayer of the IBS and the
  CBS under the regular regime.

        Art. 33. The simplified split payment procedure shall be optional and shall comply with the provisions of this article.       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)


       § 1 In the simplified procedure referred to in the caput of this article, the amounts of the IBS and the CBS to be segregated and collected by the payment service
  provider or by the institution operating the payment system shall be calculated based on a pre-established percentage of the value of the transactions.

        § 2 The percentage referred to in § 1 of this article:

        I - shall be established by the IBS Management Committee, for the IBS, and by the RFB, for the CBS, with the application of the simplified procedure to only one
  of these taxes being prohibited;

        II - may be differentiated by economic sector or by taxpayer, based on calculations grounded on a previously disclosed uniform methodology, including
  data on the average rate levied on the transactions and the history of use of credits; and

        III - shall bear no relation to the amount of the IBS and CBS debits actually levied on the transaction.

         § 2-A. The origination of a payment transaction relating to a transaction with goods or services without the identification of the amounts of the IBS and the CBS, under the terms
  of item II of § 1 of art. 32 of this Complementary Law, implies opting for the simplified procedure referred to in this article. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

          § 3 The amounts of the IBS and the CBS collected through the simplified procedure referred to in the caput shall be used for payment of the unextinguished
  debts of the taxpayer arising from the transactions referred to in the caput occurring in the assessment period, in chronological order of the tax document, according to
  criteria established in the regulations.

        § 3 The amounts of the IBS and the CBS collected through the simplified procedure referred to in this article shall be used for payment, in chronological
  order of the tax document: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       I - of unextinguished debts of the taxpayer arising from transactions occurring in the assessment period in which the acquirer is not a taxpayer of the IBS and
  the CBS under the regular regime; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - of other unextinguished debts of the taxpayer, at the end of the assessment period, if amounts not used under the terms of item I of § 3
  of this article remain. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 4 The IBS Management Committee and the RFB shall:
         I - calculate the balance of the IBS and CBS debits of the transactions referred to in the caput of this article, after deduction of the portions already extinguished by
  any of the methods provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law, in the assessment period; and
         II - transfer to the supplier, within 3 (three) business days counted from the conclusion of the assessment, the amounts received that exceed the amount referred to in
  item I of this paragraph.

        § 4 The IBS Management Committee (CGIBS) and the RFB shall transfer to the supplier, within 3 (three) business days counted from the conclusion of the assessment, the amounts of the IBS
  and the CBS collected through the simplified procedure in the assessment period and not used under the terms of § 3 of this article. (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 5 The option referred to in the caput of this article shall be irrevocable for the entire assessment period.   (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 5 (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 6 A joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB may determine the use of the simplified procedure referred to in this article for the transactions
  referred to in the caput, while the standard procedure described in art. 32 is not operating at an adequate level for the main electronic
  payment instruments used in those transactions.

        § 6 A joint act of the CGIBS and the RFB may determine the use of the simplified procedure referred to in this article for transactions in which the
  acquirer is not a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime, while the standard procedure described in art. 32 is not operating at an adequate
  level for the main electronic payment instruments used in those transactions. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7 Collection of the IBS and the CBS through the simplified procedure referred to in this article:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - ensures the extinction of the taxpayer's debts exclusively under the terms of § 3 of this article; and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - does not give rise to any right, for the acquirer that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime, to appropriate credit for the amount segregated and
  collected.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 34. The following rules must also be observed for split payment:

        I - the segregation and collection of the IBS and the CBS shall occur on the date of financial settlement of the payment transaction, subject to the payment flows
  established between the participants in the arrangement;

        II - in transactions with goods or services with payment made in installments by the supplier, the segregation and collection of the IBS and the CBS shall be
  carried out, proportionally, at the financial settlement of all installments;

        III - the early settlement of receivables does not alter the obligation to segregate and collect the IBS and the CBS in the manner of items I and II of this caput;

      IV - the provisions of this Subsection do not remove the liability of the taxpayer for payment of any balance payable of the IBS and the CBS, observing the
  moment of occurrence of the taxable event and the due date of the taxes; and

        V - the providers of payment services and the institutions operating payment systems:

        a) shall be liable for segregating and collecting the amounts of the IBS and the CBS in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection; and

       a) shall be liable for segregating and collecting the amounts of the IBS and the CBS in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection; and                    (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) shall not be tax liable for the IBS and the CBS levied on transactions with goods and services whose payments they settle.

        Art. 35. The Executive Branch of the Union and the IBS Management Committee shall approve a budget for the development, implementation, operation and maintenance of the
  split payment system.  Effects to take place [Produção de efeitos]

        § 1 Split payment shall come into operation simultaneously, in transactions with acquirers that are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS under the
  regular regime, for the main electronic payment instruments used in those transactions.

        § 2 A joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB:

        I - shall establish the gradual implementation of split payment; and

        II - may provide for cases in which the adoption of split payment shall be optional.

        § 3 The main electronic payment instruments, for purposes of the provisions of § 1 of this article, are those predominantly used in the retail sector.


                                                                                      Subsection IV

                                                                          On Collection by the Acquirer

        Art. 36. The acquirer of goods or services that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime may pay the IBS and the CBS levied on the
  transaction if payment to the supplier is made using a payment instrument that does not permit segregation and collection under the
  terms of arts. 32 and 33 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The option referred to in the caput of this article shall be exercised exclusively through collection, by the acquirer, of the IBS and the CBS levied on the
  transaction.

           § 2 (VETOED).

           § 3 The amount collected in the manner of this article:

           I - shall be used exclusively for payment of the amounts of unextinguished debits of the IBS and the CBS relating to the respective transactions; and

           II - when in excess of the amount used under the terms of item I of this paragraph, shall be transferred to the taxpayer within 3 (three) business days.

           § 4 The IBS Management Committee and the RFB shall establish a mechanism for monitoring, by the supplier, of collection by the acquirer.

                                                                                       Subsection V

                                                                           On Payment by the Liable Party

          Art. 37. The provisions of art. 29 of this Complementary Law apply, as applicable, to payment of the IBS and the CBS by the party to which this Complementary Law
  assigns the status of liable party.

                                                                                        Section IX

                                                                          On Undue or Excess Payment

           Art. 38. In the case of undue or excess payment, refund of the IBS and the CBS shall be due to the taxpayer only in the case in which:

           I - the transaction has not generated a credit for the acquirer of the goods or services; and

           II - the provisions of art. 166 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code), have been observed.

                                                                                         Section X

                                                                                   On Reimbursement

         Art. 39. The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS that assesses a recoverable balance under the terms of art. 45 at the end of the assessment period may request its
  reimbursement, in full or in part.

        § 1 If the reimbursement is not requested or the request is partial, the remaining amount of the recoverable balance shall constitute a credit of the taxpayer, which
  may be used for offsetting or reimbursed in subsequent periods.

           § 2 The reimbursement request referred to in this article shall be assessed by the IBS Management Committee, in relation to the IBS, and by the RFB, in relation to the CBS.

           § 3 The time period for assessment of the reimbursement request shall be:

        I - up to 30 (thirty) days counted from the date of the request referred to in the caput of this article, for reimbursement requests from taxpayers enrolled in
  compliance programs developed by the IBS Management Committee and the RFB that meet the provisions of art. 40 of this Complementary Law;

        II - up to 60 (sixty) days counted from the date of the request referred to in the caput of this article, for reimbursement requests that meet the provisions of art. 40
  of this Complementary Law, except for the case provided for in item I of this paragraph; or

           III - up to 180 (one hundred eighty) days counted from the date of the request referred to in the caput of this article, in other cases.

        § 4 If there is no response from the IBS Management Committee or the RFB within the periods provided for in § 3 of this article, the credit shall be reimbursed to the taxpayer within the
  15 (fifteen) subsequent days.

           § 5 If an audit procedure relating to the reimbursement request is initiated before the end of the periods established in § 3 of this article,
  the following shall occur:

           I - the periods shall be suspended; and

           II - the approved credits shall be reimbursed within 15 (fifteen) days counted from the conclusion of the audit.

           § 6 The audit procedure referred to in § 5 of this article may not extend for more than 360 (three hundred sixty) days.

         § 7 If the audit procedure is not concluded within the period referred to in § 6 of this article, the credit shall be reimbursed to the taxpayer within the 15 (fifteen)
  subsequent days.

        § 8 Reimbursement made under the terms of this article does not preclude the possibility of a subsequent audit of the reimbursed credits, nor does it prejudice the conclusion
  of the procedure referred to in § 6 of this article.

         § 9 The amount of credit balances whose reimbursement has been requested under the terms of this article shall be adjusted, if payment occurs from the first
  day of the second month following the request, at the Selic rate accrued monthly from that date until the month prior to payment, plus 1% (one
  percent) in the month of payment.

           § 10. The periods referred to in § 3 shall be suspended, for up to 5 (five) years, with § 9 of this article not applying, if the taxpayer exercises the option:

           I - for Simples Nacional or for MEI, except in the case referred to in § 3 of art. 41 of this Complementary Law; or

           II - to not be a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS, in the cases authorized in this Complementary Law.

         § 11. In the event of non-compliance with the periods provided for in §§ 3 to 5 of this article, the amount of the credit balance shall be adjusted daily at the Selic rate from
  the first day of the start of the period for assessment of the request until the day before that of reimbursement.

           Art. 40. The reimbursement periods provided for in items I or II of § 3 of art. 39 of this Complementary Law shall apply to:

           I - the appropriated credits of the IBS and the CBS relating to the acquisition of goods and services incorporated into the taxpayer's fixed assets;


        II - reimbursement requests whose amount is equal to or less than 150% (one hundred fifty percent) of the average monthly value of the difference between:

        a) the credits of the IBS and the CBS appropriated by the taxpayer; and

        b) the debits of the IBS and the CBS levied on the taxpayer's transactions.

         § 1 The calculation of the average monthly value referred to in item II of the caput shall be carried out based on information relating to the 24 (twenty-four) months
  preceding the assessment period, excluding from the calculation the credits appropriated under the terms of item I of the caput of this article.

        § 2 The regulations shall govern the manner of application of the provisions of this article, including as to:

       I - the use of estimates for the amounts referred to in items "a" and "b" of item II of the caput of this article, during the initial years of collection of the IBS and
  the CBS, while the information referred to in those items is not available;

        II - the possibility of adjustment in the calculation referred to in item II of the caput of this article, as a result of the increase in the IBS rate between 2029 and 2033.

        § 3 The value calculated under the terms of item II of the caput of this article may be adjusted, under the terms of the regulations, so as to take into account seasonal variations
  in the value of the taxpayer's transactions and acquisitions and variations arising from the expansion or establishment of an economic undertaking by the taxpayer.

         § 4 For purposes of the provisions of item I of the caput of this article, also considered as goods and services incorporated into fixed assets shall be those
  of the same nature that, as a result of applicable accounting standards, are recorded by public service concessionaires as a contract asset,
  intangible asset or financial asset.

                                                                                      Section XI

                                                                            On Assessment Regimes

         Art. 41. The regular regime of the IBS and the CBS comprises all rules of levy and assessment provided for in this Complementary Law, including those
  applicable to the differentiated regimes and to the specific regimes.

        § 1 A taxpayer that does not exercise the option for Simples Nacional or for MEI, referred to in Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, is subject to the regular
  regime of the IBS and the CBS referred to in this Complementary Law.

        § 2 Taxpayers opting for Simples Nacional or for MEI are subject to the rules of those regimes.

        § 3 Those opting for Simples Nacional may exercise the option to assess and collect the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime, in which case the IBS and the CBS
  shall be assessed and collected in accordance with the provisions of this Complementary Law.

        § 4 The option referred to in § 3 shall be exercised under the terms of Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006.

        § 5 A taxpayer under Simples Nacional, or a taxpayer that comes to opt for that regime, is prohibited from withdrawing from the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS
  if it has received reimbursement of credits of those taxes in the current or prior calendar year, under the terms of art. 39 of this Complementary Law.

        § 6 The provisions of § 5 of this article apply, in relation to the other cases in which an individual, legal entity or entity without legal personality
  exercises the optional election for taxpayer status subject to the regular regime, in the cases provided for in this Complementary Law.
        Art. 42. The assessment relating to the IBS and the CBS shall consolidate the operations carried out by all establishments of the taxpayer.

        § 1º Payment of the IBS and the CBS and the request for reimbursement shall be centralized in a single establishment.

        § 2º The assessment shall consolidate all debits and credits of the taxpayer under the regular regime, including those arising from the assessment of the differentiated
  and specific regimes, except in the cases expressly provided for in this Complementary Law.

        Art. 43. The assessment period for the IBS and the CBS shall be monthly.

        Art. 44. The regulation shall establish:

        I - the deadline for completion of the assessment; and

        II - the due date of the taxes.

        Art. 45. For each assessment period, the taxpayer shall assess, separately, the balance of the IBS and the CBS, which shall correspond to the difference between the
  values:

        I - of the IBS and CBS debits arising from taxable events occurring in the assessment period;

          II - of the credits appropriated in the same period, including presumed credits, plus the balance to be recovered from prior period or periods not
  used for offsetting or reimbursement.

        § 1º The taxpayer may make positive or negative adjustments to the balance assessed under the caput of this article, under the terms set forth in the regulation.

        § 2º Among the adjustments referred to in § 1º of this article is included the reversal of a credit appropriated in a prior assessment period, applying the increases referred to
  in §§ 2º to 4º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law from the date on which the improper appropriation of the credit occurred.

         § 3º From the balance assessed under the caput and § 1º of this article, the amounts extinguished by the modalities provided for in items III to V of the caput of
  art. 27 shall be deducted, resulting in:

        I - when positive, a balance payable that must be paid by the taxpayer; and

        II - when negative, a balance to be recovered that may be used for reimbursement or offsetting as provided for in this Complementary Law.

        § 4º The assessment carried out under the terms of this article implies a confession of debt by the taxpayer and constitutes the tax credit.

        § 5º The confession of debt referred to in § 4º is a suitable and sufficient instrument for demanding the amount of the IBS and the CBS levied on the operations therein
  recorded.

         § 6º The assessment referred to in this article must be carried out and delivered to the IBS Management Committee and to the RFB within the deadline for completion of the assessment, referred to
  in item I of the caput of art. 44 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 46. The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may, respectively, present to the taxable person an assisted assessment of the balance of the IBS and the CBS for the assessment
  period.

        § 1º The balance of the assessment referred to in the caput of this article shall be calculated under the terms of the caput of art. 45 of this Complementary Law and shall be based on:

        I - electronic tax documents;
        II - information relating to the extinction of IBS and CBS debits by any of the modalities provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law; and

        III - other information provided by the taxpayer or relating to the taxpayer.

       § 2º If the assisted assessment referred to in the caput of this article is presented, the assessment by the taxpayer referred to in art. 45 of this Complementary
  Law may only be carried out by means of adjustments to the assisted assessment.

         § 3º The assisted assessment carried out under the terms of this article, if the taxpayer confirms it or makes adjustments to it, implies a confession of debt and constitutes the
  tax credit.

        § 4º In the absence of a statement by the taxpayer on the assisted assessment within the deadline for completion of the assessment referred to in item I of the caput of art. 44
  of this Complementary Law, the assessed balance is presumed correct and the tax credit is deemed constituted.

        § 5º The confession of debt and the assisted assessment referred to, respectively, in §§ 3º and 4º of this article are suitable and sufficient instruments for
  demanding the amounts of the IBS and the CBS levied on the operations recorded therein.

         § 6º The balance resulting from the assessment referred to in this article shall constitute a balance payable or a balance to be recovered, as the case may be, applying the provisions of § 3º of
  art. 45 of this Complementary Law.

        § 7º The provisions of this article do not preclude the prerogative of an ex officio assessment of a tax credit relating to differences subsequently verified by the
  tax administration.

        § 8º The assisted assessment referred to in the caput of this article must be uniform and synchronized for the IBS and the CBS.

                                                                                     Section XII

                                                                              Of Non-Cumulativity

         Art. 47. A taxpayer subject to the regular regime may appropriate IBS and CBS credits when the extinction, by any of the modalities provided for
  in art. 27, occurs of the debits relating to the operations in which it is the acquirer, excluding exclusively those considered to be for personal use or consumption, under the terms of
  art. 57 of this Complementary Law, and the other cases provided for in this Complementary Law.

        § 1º The appropriation of the credits referred to in the caput of this article:

       I - shall be carried out separately for the IBS and for the CBS, it being prohibited, under any circumstances, to offset IBS credits against amounts owed of
  CBS and to offset CBS credits against amounts owed of IBS; and

        II - is conditioned on proof of the operation by means of a valid electronic tax document.

        § 2º The amounts of the IBS and CBS credits appropriated shall correspond to:

        I - the amounts of the debits, respectively, of the IBS and the CBS that have been indicated on the tax document of acquisition and extinguished by any of the
  modalities provided for in art. 27; or

        II - the amounts of presumed credit, in the cases provided for in this Complementary Law.

        § 3º The provisions of this article apply, including, to acquisitions of goods or services supplied by a party opting for the Simples Nacional.

        § 4º In operations in which the taxpayer is the acquirer of fuels taxed under the specific regime referred to in Chapter I of Title V of this Book, proof of extinction of the IBS and CBS debits is
  waived for the appropriation of credits.

        § 5º In the case referred to in § 4º, the credits shall be equivalent to the amounts of the IBS and the CBS recorded on a valid electronic tax document.

        § 6º The acquirer must reverse the appropriated credit if the acquired good is destroyed, deteriorates, or is the subject of robbery, theft, or misplacement.

          § 7º In the case of robbery or theft of a fixed asset, the reversal of credit referred to in § 6º of this article shall be made proportionally to the useful life period
  and to the depreciation rates defined in the regulation.

         § 8º In the return and cancellation of operations by an acquirer that is not a taxpayer under the regular regime, the supplier subject to the regular regime may appropriate
  credits based on the amounts of the debits levied on the returned or cancelled operation.

        § 8º In the return and cancellation of operations in which the acquirer is not a taxpayer under the regular regime, the supplier subject to the regular regime
  may appropriate credits or reverse debits based on the amounts of the debits levied on the returned or cancelled operation. (Wording given by Complementary Law
  No. 227 of 2026)

         § 9º In the case where payment of the IBS and the CBS is made through the Simples Nacional, when the option for the regular regime referred to in
  § 3º of art. 41 of this Complementary Law is not exercised:

        I - the appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the party opting for the Simples Nacional shall not be permitted; and

         II - the taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS shall be permitted to appropriate IBS and CBS credits corresponding to the amounts of those
  taxes paid on the acquisition of goods and services from a party opting for the Simples Nacional, in an amount equivalent to that owed under that regime.

         § 10. The carrying out of operations subject to a reduced rate shall not result in the reversal, in whole or in part, of the credits appropriated by the taxpayer in its
  acquisitions, except when expressly provided for in this Complementary Law.

        § 11. The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime may take credit for the amounts of the extinguished debits relating to supplies of goods and services not
  paid by an acquirer whose bankruptcy has been declared, under the terms of Law No. 11.101, of February 9, 2005, provided that:

        I - the acquisition of the good or service did not permit the appropriation of credits by the acquirer;

        II - the operation has been recorded in the taxpayer's accounting since the assessment period in which the taxable event of the IBS and the CBS occurred; and

        III - the payment of the creditors of the bankrupt acquirer has been definitively concluded.

        § 12. In cases of return and cancellation of operations in which the acquirer is a taxpayer under the regular regime, the regulation shall govern the
  procedures and requirements to be observed, which may consist of: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - for the acquirer, the establishment of a debit or reversal of credit; and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - for the supplier, appropriation of credit or reversal of debit.       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 13. In the return and cancellation of operations whose IBS and CBS debit has been extinguished, in whole or in part, by reason of payment through the
  financial settlement carried out under the terms of arts. 31 to 34 of this Complementary Law (split payment), the regulation may provide for the total or partial transfer to the
  supplier of the amount paid, observing the following:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
        I - the transfer must be carried out within a period of up to 3 (three) business days counted from the date of the reversal of the debit or from the date on which the
  appropriation of credit by the supplier would have been permitted; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the amount transferred may not be appropriated as credit by the supplier.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 48. The requirement of extinction of the debits for purposes of appropriation of the credits referred to in the caput of art. 47 of this Complementary Law shall be waived,
  exclusively, if none of the following modalities of extinction has been implemented:

        I - payment through the financial settlement of the operation (split payment), under the terms of arts. 31 and 32 of this Complementary Law; or

        II - payment by the acquirer, under the terms of art. 36 of this Complementary Law.

       Sole paragraph. In the case referred to in the caput of this article, the appropriation of the credits shall be conditioned on the correct amounts of the IBS and the
  CBS being indicated on the electronic tax document relating to the acquisition.

        Art. 49. Operations that are immune, exempt, or subject to a zero rate, deferral, or suspension shall not permit the appropriation of credits by the acquirers of the
  goods and services.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of the caput of this article do not prevent the appropriation of the presumed credits expressly provided for in this Complementary Law.

        Art. 50. In cases of suspension, if the suspended credit is demanded, the appropriation of the credits shall only be permitted at the time of the extinction
  of the debits by any of the modalities provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law, it being prohibited to appropriate credits with respect to statutory increases.

        Art. 51. Immunity and exemption shall result in the cancellation of the credits relating to prior operations.

         § 1º The cancellation of the credits referred to in the caput of this article shall be proportional to the value of the immune and exempt operations relative to the value of all
  operations of the supplier.

        § 2º The provisions of the caput and § 1º of this article do not apply to:

        I - exports; and

        II - operations referred to in items IV and VI of the caput of art. 9º of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 52. In the case of operations subject to a zero rate, the credits relating to prior operations shall be maintained.

        Art. 53. IBS and CBS credits appropriated in each assessment period may be used, in the following order, by means of:

         I - offsetting against the balance payable of the IBS and the CBS that is due, not extinguished, and not recorded as outstanding tax debt relating to prior assessment periods,
  including statutory increases; and

         II - offsetting against the IBS and CBS debits arising from taxable events of the same assessment period, observing the chronological order referred to
  in item I of the sole paragraph of art. 27 of this Complementary Law; and

       III - offsetting, respectively, against the IBS and CBS debits arising from taxable events of subsequent assessment periods, observing the
  chronological order referred to in item I of the sole paragraph of art. 27 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1º As an alternative to the provisions of item III, the taxpayer may request reimbursement, under the terms of Section X of this Chapter.

         § 2º IBS and CBS credits shall be appropriated and offset or reimbursed at their nominal value, monetary correction or adjustment being prohibited, without
  prejudice to the cases of interest increases relating to reimbursement expressly provided for in this Complementary Law.

         Art. 54. The right to use the credits shall be extinguished after a period of 5 (five) years, counted from the first day of the period following that of the assessment in
  which the appropriation of the credit occurred.

        Art. 55. The transfer, under any title, to another person or entity without legal personality, of IBS and CBS credits is prohibited.

        Sole paragraph. In the case of merger, spin-off, or incorporation, credits appropriated and not yet used may be transferred to the successor
  legal entity, the original date of appropriation of the credits being preserved for purposes of counting the period referred to in art. 54 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 56. The provisions of this Section apply to all cases of appropriation and use of IBS and CBS credits provided for in this Complementary Law.

                                                                                    Section XIII

                                                                  Of Goods and Services for Personal Use or Consumption

        Art. 57. The following are considered to be for personal use or consumption:

        I - the following goods and services:

        a) jewelry, precious stones and metals;

        b) works of art and antiques of historical or archaeological value;

        c) alcoholic beverages;

        d) tobacco products;

        e) weapons and ammunition;

        f) recreational, sports, and aesthetic goods and services;

        g) goods and services related to the acquisition or maintenance of the goods referred to in this item;        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - goods and services acquired or produced by the taxpayer and supplied free of charge or at a value below market value to:

       II - goods and services acquired by the taxpayer and supplied free of charge or at a value below market value to:           (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) the taxpayer itself, when it is a natural person;

        b) natural persons who are partners, shareholders, officers, and members of boards of administration and audit and of advisory committees of the
  board of administration of the taxpayer provided for by law;

        c) the employees of the taxpayers referred to in items "a" and "b" of this item; and
        c) the employees of the taxpayer; and       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        d) spouses, partners, or relatives, by blood or affinity, up to the third degree, of the natural persons referred to in items "a", "b", and "c" of this item.

        § 1º For purposes of item II of the caput of this article, goods and services for personal use or consumption include, among others:

        I - residential real property and other goods and services related to its acquisition and maintenance; and

        II - a vehicle and other goods and services related to its acquisition and maintenance, including insurance and fuel.

        § 2º In the case of a company whose main activity is the management of assets of the natural persons referred to in item II of the caput of this article and of the
  financial assets of such natural persons (family office), the goods and services related to such management shall be considered to be for personal use and consumption.

       § 3º Goods and services predominantly used in the economic activity of the taxpayer shall not be considered goods and services for personal use or consumption, in accordance
  with the following criteria:

       I - the goods provided for in items "a" to "d" of item I of the caput of this article that are marketed or used for the manufacture of goods to be
  marketed;

        II - the goods provided for in item "e" of item I of the caput of this article that meet the provisions of item I of this paragraph or are used by
  security companies;

        III - the goods provided for in item "f" of item I of the caput of this article that meet the provisions of item I of this paragraph or are used exclusively at a
  physical establishment by its customers;

        IV - the goods and services provided for in item II of the caput of this article that consist of:

        a) uniforms and work clothing;

        b) personal protective equipment;

         c) food and non-alcoholic beverages made available at the taxpayer's establishment to its employees and officers during the workday;

        d) health services made available at the taxpayer's establishment to its employees and officers during the workday;

        e) daycare services made available at the taxpayer's establishment to its employees and officers during the workday;

        f) health care plan services and the provision of transportation vouchers, meal vouchers, and food vouchers intended for employees and their
  dependents pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or convention, the credits on the acquisition of these services being equivalent to the respective debits of the
  supplier assessed and extinguished in accordance with the provisions of the specific regimes for health care plans and financial services;

        f) health care plan services intended for employees and their dependents pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or convention,
  the credits on the acquisition of these services being equivalent to the respective debits of the supplier assessed and extinguished in accordance with the provisions of the specific
  regime for health care plans; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        g) educational benefits to its employees and dependents pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or convention, including through the granting of
  scholarships or discounts on tuition, provided that these benefits are offered to all employees, differentiation in favor of
  lower-income employees or those with larger households being authorized; and

        h) provision of transportation vouchers, meal vouchers, and food vouchers, the credits on the acquisition of these services being equivalent to the respective debits
  of the supplier assessed and extinguished in accordance with the provisions of the specific regime for financial services, observing the rules applicable to payment
  arrangements; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        V - other goods and services that meet criteria established in the regulation.

        § 4º Goods and services not related to the pursuit of economic activity by a natural person characterized as a taxpayer of the
  regular regime shall be considered to be for personal use or consumption. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 4º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 5º With respect to goods and services for personal use or consumption referred to in this article, the appropriation of credits is prohibited.

        § 6º If credits have been appropriated on the acquisition of goods or services for personal use or consumption, debits shall be required in amounts
  equivalent to those of the credits, with the statutory increases referred to in § 2º of art. 29, calculated from the date of appropriation. (Repealed by Complementary Law
  No. 227 of 2026)

        § 6º (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 7º In the case of the supply of a good of the taxpayer for temporary use by the natural persons referred to in item II of the caput of this article, debits shall be
  required in amounts equivalent to those of the credits, calculated proportionally to the useful life period of the good in relation to the time used by the
  taxpayer, with the statutory increases referred to in § 2º of art. 29, as set forth in the regulation. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7º (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8º The regulation shall provide for the manner of identifying the natural person recipient of the goods and services referred to in this article.

         § 9º In the case of disposal of a good that did not permit the appropriation of credit when it was acquired, under the terms of § 5º of this article, the
  taxpayer may exclude from the tax base the acquisition value of the good, up to the limit of the disposal value, provided that unambiguous identification
  of the good is possible. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                  CHAPTER III

                                                                OF THE OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

                                                                                    Section I

                                                                              General Provisions

         Art. 58. The IBS Management Committee and the RFB shall act jointly to implement integrated solutions for the administration of the IBS and the CBS, without
  prejudice to their respective legal competencies. Effects to take place

         § 1º The taxpayer shall access information on the assessment and payment of the IBS and the CBS on a unified electronic platform, with shared management
  between the IBS Management Committee and the RFB.


        § 2º The unified electronic platform referred to in § 1º of this article shall make available a taxpayer service channel for resolving problems
  relating to the operation of assessment and payment of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 3º Without prejudice to the provisions of §§ 1º and 2º of this article, the IBS Management Committee and the RFB may maintain their own systems for administration of the IBS
  and the CBS.

       § 4º The taxpayer is guaranteed free access to the systemic integration mechanisms for sending and receiving minimum data and transactions
  intended for the assessment and compliance with ancillary obligations relating to the IBS and the CBS, made available, respectively, by the CGIBS and by the
  RFB. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 5º The CGIBS and the RFB may provide, upon reimbursement of costs, automated transactions that go beyond the minimum necessary for
  assessment and compliance with ancillary obligations, as defined in the regulation. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section II

                                                                       Of the Registry with Unique Identification

          Art. 59. Natural and legal persons and entities without legal personality subject to the IBS and the CBS are required to register in a registry with
  unique identification, observing the provisions of items "a" and "b" of item I of § 3º of art. 11 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1º For purposes of the caput of this article, the following registries administered by the RFB shall be considered:

        I - for natural persons, the Cadastro de Pessoas Físicas (CPF - Individual Taxpayer Registry);

        II - for legal persons and entities without legal personality, the Cadastro Nacional da Pessoa Jurídica (CNPJ - National Registry of Legal Entities); and

        III - for rural and urban real property, the Cadastro Imobiliário Brasileiro (CIB - Brazilian Real Property Registry).

        § 2º Registry information shall have mandatory and timely integration, synchronization, cooperation, and sharing in a national data environment among
  the federal, state, Federal District, and municipal tax administrations.

        § 3º The national environment for sharing and integrating registry information shall have shared management through the Comitê para Gestão da Rede
  Nacional para Simplificação do Registro e da Legalização de Empresas e Negócios (CGSIM) referred to in item III of the caput of art. 2º of Complementary Law No. 123,
  of December 14, 2006.

        § 4º The federal, state, Federal District, and municipal tax administrations may process supplementary data and specific attributes for the tax management of the
  IBS and the CBS, observing the provisions of § 2º of this article.

         § 5º The Domicílio Tributário Eletrônico (DTE - Electronic Tax Domicile) provided for in art. 332 of this Complementary Law shall be unified and mandatory for all
  entities and other legal persons subject to registration with the CNPJ.

        § 5º The Domicílio Tributário Eletrônico (DTE) provided for in art. 332 of this Complementary Law shall be unified, within the scope of the IBS, and mandatory for all
  entities and other legal persons subject to registration with the CNPJ. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section III

                                                                          Of the Electronic Tax Document

          Art. 60. The taxable person of the IBS and the CBS, when carrying out operations with goods or services, including exports and imports, must issue an electronic tax
  document.

       § 1º The information provided by the taxable person under the terms of this article has a declaratory nature and constitutes a confession of the amount owed of IBS and
  CBS recorded in the tax document.

        § 2º The obligation to issue electronic tax documents applies including to:

        I - operations that are immune, exempt, or covered by a zero rate or suspension;

        II - the transfer of goods between establishments belonging to the same taxpayer; and

        III - other cases provided for in the regulation.

       § 3º For purposes of the assessment of the IBS and the CBS, the IBS Management Committee and the tax administrations responsible for authorizing or receiving
  electronic tax documents shall observe the form, content, and deadlines provided for in a joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB. Effects to take place

      § 4º Electronic tax documents relating to operations with goods or services must be shared with all federative entities at the
  time of authorization or receipt, using uniform technical standards.

        § 5º The regulation may require the taxable person to submit supplementary information necessary for the assessment of the IBS and the CBS.

       § 6º A valid tax document is considered to be the record of information that meets the requirements established in the regulation, observing the provisions of this Complementary
  Law.

        § 7º For purposes of simplification, the joint act referred to in § 3º of this article must permit the issuance of consolidated tax documents.         (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section IV

                                                                 Of Programs to Encourage Fiscal Citizenship

        Art. 61. The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may establish programs to encourage fiscal citizenship by means of encouraging consumers to demand the
  issuance of tax documents.

        § 1º The programs referred to in the caput of this article may be financed by an amount equivalent to up to 0.05% (five hundredths of one percent) of the
  IBS and CBS revenue collection.

          § 2º The regulation may provide for cases in which the information submitted under the terms of item I of § 1º of art. 32 of this Complementary Law may
  be used to identify the acquirer who is not a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS in the respective electronic tax documents, the acquirer's option
  for another form of identification being guaranteed.

                                                                                      Section V

                                                                              Transitional Provisions

        Art. 62. The Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities are required to:       Effects to take place
        I - adapt the current authorizing systems and applications for simplified issuance of electronic tax documents for use of a standardized layout,
  that allows taxpayers to provide the data relating to the IBS and the CBS necessary for the assessment of these taxes; and

        II - share the electronic tax documents, after receipt, validation, and authorization, with the national common-use environment of the IBS Management
  Committee and the tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities.

        § 1º For purposes of the caput of this article, the Municipalities and the Federal District are required, as of January 1, 2026, to:

        I - authorize their taxpayers to issue the national-standard Nota Fiscal de Serviços Eletrônica (NFS-e) in the national environment or, in the case of
  having their own issuing system, share the electronic tax documents generated, in accordance with a standardized layout, with the national data environment of the NFS-e; and

        II - share the content of other forms of electronic declaration, in accordance with a standardized layout defined in the regulation, with the national data
  environment of the NFS-e.

        § 2º The provisions of § 1º of this article apply until December 31, 2032.

        § 3º The data of the national centralizing environment of the NFS-e must be immediately shared in the national environment under the terms of item II of § 1º
  of this article.

        § 4º The standard and layout referred to in items I and II of § 1º of this article are those defined in an agreement entered into between the tax administration of the
  Union, the Federal District, and the Municipalities that established the NFS-e, developed and managed by the Comitê Gestor da Nota Fiscal de Serviços Eletrônica de padrão
  nacional (CGNFS-e - National Standard Electronic Service Invoice Management Committee).

          § 5º The national data environment of the NFS-e is the repository that ensures the integrity and availability of the information contained in the shared
  tax documents.

         § 6º The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may define alternative solutions to the NFS-e platform, subject to adoption of the national standard NFS-e layout
  for purposes of sharing in the national environment.

        § 7º Failure to comply with the provisions of the caput of this article shall result in the temporary suspension of voluntary transfers.

                                                                                   CHAPTER IV

                                                                    OF THE IBS AND THE CBS ON IMPORTS

                                                                                      Section I

                                                                            Of the Taxable Event

         Art. 63. The IBS and the CBS shall be levied on the import of goods or services from abroad carried out by a natural or legal person or entity without legal
  personality, even if not registered or required to register under the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, for whatever purpose.

        Sole paragraph. Except as specifically provided for in this Chapter, the rules relating to onerous operations referred to in Chapter II of this Title shall apply to the
  import referred to in the caput of this article.

                                                                                      Section II

                                                                 Of the Import of Intangible Goods and Services

         Art. 64. For purposes of art. 63 of this Complementary Law, an import of a service or of an intangible good, including rights, is considered to be the supply
  made by a party resident or domiciled abroad whose consumption occurs in the Country, even if the supply is made abroad.

        § 1º Consumption of intangible goods and services is considered to be use, exploitation, enjoyment, fruition, or access.

       § 1º Consumption in the Country of a service or of an intangible good, including rights, is considered to be the supply made by a party resident or domiciled abroad:
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - whose place of the operation is in the Country, under the terms of items II to IX of the caput of art. 11 of this Complementary Law; or         (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

        II - in which the acquirer or the recipient is resident or domiciled in the Country, in the other cases.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2º The provision by a party resident or domiciled abroad is also considered to be an import of a service:

        I - carried out in the Country;

        II - related to real or personal property located in the Country; or

        III - related to personal property that is sent abroad for the provision of the service and returns to the Country after its completion.

        § 3º In the case of consumption of services or intangible goods, including rights, occurring concurrently in national territory and abroad, only the
  portion whose consumption occurs in the Country shall be considered an import.

       § 4º Intangible goods, including rights, and services whose value is included in the customs value of imported material goods under the terms of art. 69 of this
  Complementary Law shall be subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS in accordance with Section III of this Chapter.

        § 5º In the import of intangible goods or of services referred to in the caput of this article:

        I - the taxable event of the IBS and the CBS shall be deemed to have occurred:

        a) at the time defined in accordance with the provisions of art. 10 of this Complementary Law;

        b) at the place defined in accordance with the provisions of art. 11 of this Complementary Law;      (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) (repealed);    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the tax base is the value of the operation under the terms of art. 12 of this Complementary Law;

         III - the rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on each import of an intangible good or of a service are the same as those levied on the supply of the same intangible
  good or service in the Country, observing the specific provisions relating to the setting of rates on imports of intangible goods or of services subject to
  specific regimes of taxation;

        IV - for purposes of determining the state, Federal District, and municipal rates of the IBS, the place of the import is the destination of the operation defined under the terms of art. 11
  of this Complementary Law;


       IV - for purposes of determining the state, Federal District, and municipal rates of the IBS, the import is considered to have occurred in the place:       (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) of the operation defined under the terms of items II to IX of the caput of art. 11 of this Complementary Law; or      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) of the principal domicile of the acquirer or of the recipient, in the other cases;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         V - the acquirer is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS on acquisitions of intangible goods, including rights, and services from a supplier resident or domiciled
  abroad;

         VI - if the acquirer is resident or domiciled abroad, the recipient is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS on acquisitions of intangible goods, including
  rights, and services from a supplier resident or domiciled abroad;

        VII - the acquirer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS may appropriate and use credit as provided for in arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law;

         VIII - the supplier resident or domiciled abroad is jointly and severally liable, together with the taxpayer, for payment of the IBS and the CBS, observing the provisions
  of arts. 21 and 23 of this Complementary Law;

        IX - digital platforms, even if resident and domiciled abroad, shall be liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS on imports carried out
  through them, observing the provisions of arts. 22 and 23 of this Complementary Law.

        § 6º The specific rules provided for in Title V of this Book shall also apply to imports of goods and services that are the subject of specific regimes.

       § 7º Occasional consumption by a non-resident natural person temporarily present in the Country shall not be considered an import of a service or of an intangible
  good, including rights, under the terms of the regulation. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7º (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                     Section III

                                                                       Of the Import of Material Goods

                                                                                   Subsection I

                                                                                 Of the Taxable Event

        Art. 65. For purposes of art. 63 of this Complementary Law, the taxable event of the import of material goods is the entry of goods of foreign
  origin into national territory.

         Sole paragraph. For purposes of the caput of this article, goods that are recorded as having been imported and whose misplacement comes to be verified by the
  customs authority shall be presumed to have entered national territory, except with respect to baggage and international postal shipments.

        Art. 66. The following material goods do not constitute taxable events of the IBS and the CBS on imports:

        I - those that return to the Country in the following cases:

        a) sent on consignment and not sold within the authorized period;

        b) returned due to technical defect, for repair, or for replacement;

        c) due to changes in the import system by the importing country;

        d) due to war or public calamity; or

        e) due to other factors beyond the exporter's control;

        II - those that, correctly described in the transport documents, arrive in the Country due to unmistakable or proven shipping error and that are redirected
  or returned abroad;

         III - those that are identical, in equal quantity and value, and intended to replace others previously imported that have proven, after their
  release by the customs authority, to be defective or unfit for the purpose for which they were intended, under the terms of the regulation;

        IV - those that have been subject to a penalty of forfeiture prior to their release by the customs authority;

        V - those that have been returned abroad prior to registration of the import declaration;

        VI - those considered to be fish caught outside the territorial waters of the Country by a company located in its territory, provided that the
  requirements governing fishing activity are met;

        VII - those to which the temporary export regime has been applied;

        VIII - those that are in customs transit, accidentally destroyed; and

        IX - those that have been destroyed under customs control, at no cost to the public authorities, prior to their release by the customs authority.

                                                                                   Subsection II

                                                                           Of the Moment of Assessment

        Art. 67. For purposes of calculating the IBS and the CBS, the taxable event of the IBS and the CBS on the import of material goods is deemed to have occurred:

        I - upon release of goods submitted to clearance for consumption;

        II - upon release of goods submitted to the special customs regime of temporary admission for economic use;

        III - upon assessment of the corresponding tax credit, in the case of:

        a) goods included in the concept of baggage, accompanied or unaccompanied;

        b) goods listed in a manifest or in other declarations of equivalent effect, whose misplacement has been verified by the customs authority; or

        c) imported goods that have not been the subject of an import declaration.

        § 1º For purposes of item I of the caput of this article, clearance for consumption on import means the customs clearance to which goods
  imported on a definitive basis are submitted.
        § 2º The provisions of item I of the caput of this article apply, including, in the case of clearance for consumption of goods under a suspensive taxation regime and of
  goods contained in an international shipment or carried by a traveler, subject to the ordinary taxation regime.

                                                                                   Subsection III

                                                                  Of the Place of Import of Material Goods

        Art. 68. For purposes of the IBS and the CBS levied on imports of material goods, the place of import of material goods corresponds to:

        I - the place of delivery of the goods to the final recipient, under the terms of art. 11 of this Complementary Law, including in an international shipment;

        II - the principal domicile of the acquirer of bonded goods; or

        III - the place where the misplacement was characterized.

                                                                                   Subsection IV

                                                                                Of the Tax Base

        Art. 69. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS on the import of material goods is the customs value plus:

        I - the Import Tax;

        II - the Selective Tax (IS);

        III - the fee for use of the Sistema Integrado do Comércio Exterior (Siscomex - Integrated Foreign Trade System);

        IV - the Adicional ao Frete para a Renovação da Marinha Mercante (AFRMM - Merchant Marine Renewal Freight Surcharge);

        V - the Contribuição de Intervenção no Domínio Econômico levied on the import and marketing of petroleum and its derivatives, natural gas and its
  derivatives, and combustible ethyl alcohol (Cide-Combustíveis);

        VI - antidumping duties;

        VII - countervailing duties;

        VIII - safeguard measures; and

        IX - any other taxes, fees, contributions, or duties levied on the imported goods up to their release.

         § 1º The tax base of the IBS and the CBS in the case referred to in § 2º of art. 71 of this Complementary Law shall be the value that serves or would serve as the basis for
  calculating the Import Tax plus the amounts referred to in the caput, except as provided for in § 2º of this article.

        § 2º The following shall not form part of the tax base of the IBS and the CBS:

        I - the Imposto sobre Produtos Industrializados (IPI - Tax on Industrialized Products), provided for in item IV of the caput of art. 153 of the Federal Constitution;

      II - the Imposto sobre operações relativas à Circulação de Mercadorias e sobre prestações de Serviços de Transporte Interestadual e Intermunicipal e de
  Comunicação (ICMS - Tax on the Circulation of Goods and on Interstate and Intermunicipal Transportation and Communication Services), provided for in item II of the caput of art. 155 of the Federal Constitution; and

        III - the Imposto sobre Serviços de Qualquer Natureza (ISS - municipal service tax), provided for in item III of the caput of art. 156 of the Federal Constitution.

       Art. 70. For purposes of assessing the tax base, amounts expressed in foreign currency must be converted into national currency at the exchange
  rate used for calculating the Import Tax, without any subsequent adjustment arising from any exchange rate variation.

         Sole paragraph. In the case where the Import Tax is not owed, the exchange rate that would be used should taxation apply
  shall be used.

                                                                                   Subsection V

                                                                                    Of the Rate

         Art. 71. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on each import of a material good are the same as those levied on the acquisition of the respective good in the
  Country, observing the specific provisions relating to the setting of rates on imports of goods subject to specific regimes of taxation.

        Art. 71. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on each import of a material good are the same as those levied on the acquisition of the respective good
  in the Country, observing the specific provisions relating to the setting of rates on imports of goods subject to specific regimes of taxation and
  except as provided for in § 6º of art. 126 of this Complementary Law. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1º For purposes of determining the state, Federal District, and municipal rates of the IBS, the destination of the operation is the place of import, defined under the terms of art.
  68 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º Where it is not possible to identify the material good imported, due to its misplacement or consumption, and to a generic description in the
  commercial and transport documents available, the standard rates of the destination of the operation shall be applied for purposes of determining the IBS and the CBS
  levied on the import.

                                                                                   Subsection VI

                                                                                Of Tax Liability

        Art. 72. The following is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS on the import of material goods:

        I - the importer, considered as such any person or entity without legal personality that causes the entry of material goods of foreign
  origin into national territory; and

        II - the acquirer of bonded goods.

        Sole paragraph. In an import on account and order of a third party, the person that causes the entry of material goods of foreign origin into national territory is the
  acquirer of the goods abroad.

        Art. 73. The following is liable for the IBS and the CBS on the import of material goods, in substitution for the taxpayer:

        I - the carrier, with respect to goods of foreign origin, or under customs control, that it transports, when misplacement is found up to the completion of the
  unloading of the goods at the customs-bonded place or facility;


        II - the depositary, with respect to goods of foreign origin that are under customs control and under its custody, when misplacement is found
  after completion of the unloading at the customs-bonded place or facility;

        III - the beneficiary of a special customs regime who has not caused the entry of foreign goods into national territory; and

        IV - the beneficiary who causes non-compliance with the application of a suspensive customs regime intended for processing for export, in the case of
  admission of goods into the regime by another beneficiary, with its consent, with a view to carrying out a stage of the industrial chain of the product to be exported.

         Sole paragraph. In the cases of items I and II of the caput of this article, liability shall be excluded in cases of fortuitous event or force majeure.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 74. The following is jointly and severally liable for the IBS and the CBS on the import of material goods:

        I - the person that registers, in its own name, the import declaration of goods of foreign origin acquired abroad by another person;

        II - the predetermined orderer that acquires goods of foreign origin from an importing legal entity;

        III - the representative, in the Country, of the foreign carrier;

        IV - the shipper, the multimodal transport operator, or any subcontractor for carrying out the multimodal transport; and

       V - the recipient of the service or the party contracting the charter of a vessel or aircraft, under an international contract, with respect to goods admitted under a
  special customs regime by a third party.

        Art. 75. The taxable persons referred to in arts. 72 to 74 of this Complementary Law must register for compliance with the obligations relating to the IBS
  and the CBS on imports, under the terms of the regulation.

                                                                                  Subsection VII

                                                                                 Of Payment

        Art. 76. The IBS and the CBS owed on the import of material goods must be paid by the time of delivery of the goods submitted to clearance for consumption, even if
  this occurs before release of the goods by the customs authority.

        § 1º The taxable person may opt to anticipate payment of the IBS and the CBS to the time of registration of the import declaration.

         § 2º Any difference in taxes generated by the anticipation of payment shall be charged to the taxable person on the date of occurrence of the taxable event for purposes
  of calculating the IBS and the CBS, without the levy of late-payment increases.

         § 3º The regulation may establish cases in which payment of the IBS and the CBS may occur at a time later than that defined in the caput of this
  article, for taxable persons certified under the Programa Brasileiro de Operador Econômico Autorizado (Programa OEA - Brazilian Authorized Economic Operator Program) established under
  specific legislation.

         § 3º The regulation may establish cases in which payment of the IBS and the CBS may occur at a time later than that defined in the caput of this
  article, for taxable persons certified under the Programa Brasileiro de Operador Econômico Autorizado (Programa OEA) established under specific
  legislation and for goods of international shipments to which the Regime de Tributação Simplificada (RTS - Simplified Taxation Regime) has been applied.            (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 4º Payment of the IBS and the CBS is a condition for delivery of the goods, observing the provisions of § 3º of this article.

        § 5º The IBS and the CBS owed on import shall be extinguished exclusively by payment by the taxable person.

        Art. 77. Percentage differences in bulk goods that, due to their nature or handling conditions, are subject to breakage, decrease, or increase,
  assessed by the customs authority, shall not be considered for purposes of demanding the IBS and the CBS, up to the percentage limit to be defined in the regulation, which
  may be differentiated by type of good.

                                                                                  Subsection VIII

                                                                            Of Non-Cumulativity

        Art. 78. When subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, the taxpayers referred to in art. 72 and the acquirers of goods taxed under the regime
  of international shipments referred to in art. 95 may appropriate and use credits corresponding to the amounts of the IBS and the CBS actually paid on the import
  of material goods, observing the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                  CHAPTER V

                                                                   OF THE IBS AND THE CBS ON EXPORTS

                                                                                     Section I

                                                                              General Provisions

         Art. 79. Exports of goods and services abroad are immune from the IBS and the CBS, under the terms of art. 8º of this Complementary Law, the exporter being
  guaranteed the appropriation and use of the credits relating to the operations in which it is the acquirer of a good or a service, observing the prohibitions on crediting
  provided for in arts. 49 and 51, the other provisions of arts. 47 and 52 to 57 of this Complementary Law, and the provisions of this Chapter.

                                                                                     Section II

                                                               Of Exports of Intangible Goods and Services

         Art. 80. For purposes of art. 79 of this Complementary Law, an export of a service or of an intangible good, including rights, is considered to be the supply
  to a party resident or domiciled abroad and consumption abroad.

        § 1º The following are also considered to be exports:

        I - the provision of a service to a party resident or domiciled abroad related to:

        a) real property located abroad;

        b) personal property that enters the Country for the provision of the service and returns abroad after its completion, observing the period established in the regulation; and

        II - the provision of the following services, provided that they are directly and exclusively linked to the export of material goods or associated with the delivery abroad of
  material goods:



        II - the supply of the following goods and services, provided that they are directly and exclusively linked to the export of material goods or associated with the delivery
  abroad of material goods: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) intermediation in the distribution of goods abroad (agent's commission);

          b) cargo insurance;

          c) customs clearance;

          d) warehousing of goods;

          e) road, rail, air, waterway, or multimodal freight transport;

          f) cargo handling;

          g) container handling;

          h) unitization or deunitization of cargo;

          i) documentary consolidation or deconsolidation of cargo;

          j) freight forwarding of cargo;

          k) express shipments;

          l) weighing and measuring of cargo;

          m) refrigeration of cargo;

          n) operating lease or rental of containers;

          o) installation and assembly of exported goods; and

          p) training for the use of exported goods.

          § 1º-A. Consumption abroad of a service or of an intangible good, including rights, is considered to be the supply:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

       I - whose place of the operation is not in the Country, under the terms of items II to IX of the caput of art. 11 of this Complementary Law; or                    (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - in which the acquirer and the recipient are resident or domiciled abroad, in the other cases.       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

       § 2º If it is not possible for the national supplier to identify the place of consumption from the conditions and characteristics of the supply, the place of the
  consumption shall be presumed to be the place of domicile of the acquirer abroad. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3º If the consumption referred to in § 2º occurs in the Country, it shall be considered an import of a service or intangible good, including a right, observing the provisions of
  art. 64 of this Complementary Law. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 3º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 4º A person who does not carry out the export of the material goods referred to in item II of § 1º shall be required to pay the IBS and the CBS, plus interest and
  late-payment penalty, in accordance with § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, counted from the date of occurrence of the operation, in the capacity of a responsible party.

        § 5º In the case of the supply of services or of intangible goods, including rights, occurring concurrently in national territory and abroad, only the
  portion whose execution or consumption occurs abroad shall be considered an export.

         § 6º The provisions of § 1º of art. 64 of this Complementary Law apply for purposes of defining consumption abroad of services or of intangible goods, including
  rights. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 6º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 7º The specific rules provided for in Title V of this Book shall also apply to exports of goods and services that are the subject of specific regimes.

                                                                                       Section III

                                                                        Of Exports of Material Goods

        Art. 81. The immunity of the IBS and the CBS on the export of material goods referred to in art. 79 of this Complementary Law applies to exports without
  departure from national territory, in the manner governed by the regulation, when the exported goods are:

       I - fully incorporated into a good that is temporarily in the Country, owned by the foreign buyer, including under a regime of temporary
  admission under the responsibility of a third party;

         II - delivered to a body of the direct, autonomous agency, or foundation administration of the Union, the States, the Federal District, or the Municipalities, in fulfillment of
  a contract arising from an international bidding process;

          III - delivered in the Country to a body of the Ministry of Defense, to be incorporated into a product of interest to national defense under construction or manufacture in
  national territory, as a result of an international agreement;

          IV - delivered to a national company authorized to operate the duty-free shop regime;

        V - sold to a company based abroad, in the case of an aircraft manufactured in the Country and delivered to a regular air transport service provider
  based in national territory;

         VI - delivered in the Country to be incorporated into a vessel or platform under construction or conversion contracted by a company based abroad or into its
  modules, with subsequent allocation to the activities of exploration, development, and production of petroleum, natural gas, and other fluid hydrocarbons
  provided for in specific legislation; and

         VII - intended exclusively for the activities of exploration, development, and production of petroleum, natural gas, and other fluid hydrocarbons
  provided for in specific legislation, when sold to a company based abroad and as defined in specific legislation, even if carried out through a third party
  based in the Country.
        Art. 81-A. The export of material goods, including in cases where there is no physical departure from national territory as referred to in art. 81, shall be proven
  by means of registration by the competent body or documentation and procedures established in customs legislation, under the terms of the regulation. (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 1º After the period of 180 (one hundred eighty) days, counted from the issuance of the electronic tax document, without proof of the export, an
  onerous operation shall be deemed to have occurred and the CBS and the IBS levied on the operation shall be required from the exporter, with the applicable increases, including those relating to
  the operations referred to in item II of § 1º of art. 80. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2º The regulation may provide for cases extending the period provided for in § 1º of this article.          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
        Art. 82. Payment of the IBS and the CBS may be suspended on the supply of material goods for the specific purpose of export to a trading
  export company that cumulatively meets the following requirements:

        I - be certified under the OEA Program (Authorized Economic Operator);

        II - hold net equity equal to or greater than the highest of the following amounts:

        a) R$ 1,000,000.00 (one million reais); and

        b) once the total value of the suspended taxes;

        III - opt for the DTE (Electronic Tax Domicile), in the manner set out in specific legislation;

        IV - maintain accounting records and present them in digital format; and

        V - be in a situation of tax compliance before the federal, state or municipal tax administrations of its domicile.

        § 1º For the purposes of this article's caput, the trading export company must be authorized by joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB (Federal Revenue of Brazil).

        § 2º For purposes of the suspension of payment of the IBS, the certification referred to in item I of this article's caput shall be conditioned on the consent of the
  state and municipal tax administrations of the company's domicile.

        § 3º Goods sent for export shipment or to bonded facilities, on behalf of and by order of the trading export company, without any other commercial or industrial operation occurring
  in that interval, are considered acquired for the specific purpose of export.

        § 4º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput converts into a zero rate after the actual export of the goods, provided that the
  time limit set out in item I of § 5º of this article is observed.

       § 5º The trading export company is responsible for payment of the IBS and the CBS that were suspended on the supply of goods to the trading
  export company, in the following cases:

        I - if 180 (one hundred and eighty) days have elapsed from the date of issuance of the invoice by the supplier and the export has not been completed;

        II - if the goods are redirected to the domestic market;

        III - if the goods are subjected to a manufacturing process; or

        IV - if destruction, loss, theft or robbery occurs before the actual export of the goods.

        § 6º For purposes of § 5º of this article, the IBS and the CBS are considered due at the moment the taxable event occurs, as defined in art.
  10 of this Complementary Law.

         § 7º In the cases of § 5º of this article, amounts paid voluntarily shall be subject to the incidence of penalty and default interest, as set out in § 2º
  of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

         § 8º The amount set in item II of this article's caput shall be updated by the Broad National Consumer Price Index (IPCA), at intervals of no less than
  12 (twelve) months, by joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB, which shall set the initial and final terms of the update.

        § 9º The regulation shall establish:

        I - the specific requirements for the authorization procedure referred to in § 1º of this article;

        II - the frequency for presenting the accounting records referred to in item IV of this article's caput;

        III - cases in which the goods may be sent to locations other than those set out in § 3º of this article, without this undermining the specific purpose
  of export; and

         IV - requirements and conditions for carrying out transshipment, ferrying, unloading or storage operations during the shipment referred to in § 3º
  of this article.

        § 10. The regulation may set an extended time limit for application of the provision in item I of § 5º of this article, based on the type of good.

       § 11. Payment of the IBS and the CBS is also suspended on the supply of fresh (in natura) agricultural and livestock products to a taxpayer under the regular regime that
  carries out manufacturing for export abroad:

        I - whose gross revenue from export abroad, in the 3 (three) calendar years immediately preceding the acquisition, was greater than
  50% (fifty percent) of its total gross revenue from the sale of goods and services in the same period, after excluding taxes levied on the sale; and

       I - whose gross revenue from export abroad, in the 3 (three) calendar years immediately preceding the acquisition, was greater than
  30% (thirty percent) of its total gross revenue from the sale of goods and services in the same period, after excluding taxes levied on the sale; and
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 235 of 2026)

        II - that complies with the provisions of items II to V of this article's caput.

       § 12. The acquirer referred to in § 11 is responsible for payment of the suspended IBS and CBS, with the additions set out in § 2º of art. 29 of this
  Complementary Law, if, within 180 (one hundred and eighty) days counted from the date of issuance of the invoice by the supplier:

        I - the fresh (in natura) agricultural product acquired with suspension is not used for manufacturing; or

        II - the manufactured product resulting from fresh (in natura) agricultural products acquired with suspension:

        a) is not exported abroad; or

        b) is not sold on the domestic market, with the corresponding taxation.


        § 13. The regulation may establish:

          I - criteria for classification under the provisions of this article for a taxpayer starting activities or that began its activities less than 3
  (three) years ago; and

        II - cases in which the time limit referred to in § 12 of this article may be extended.

        Art. 83. The authorization referred to in § 1º of art. 82 of this Complementary Law may be cancelled in the following cases:

        I - failure to meet the requirements set out in items I to V of the caput of art. 82 of this Complementary Law; or

        II - outstanding payment referred to in § 5º of art. 82 of this Complementary Law.

       § 1º Cancellation of the authorization shall be carried out by the tax authority of the RFB or of the state, district or municipal tax administration of the domicile of the
  trading export company.

       § 2º In the cases set out in the caput of this article, a cancellation proceeding for the authorization shall be opened, supported by a finding report, and the
  trading export company shall be notified to regularize its situation or file an objection within 30 (thirty) business days, counted from the date of notice of the notification.

       § 3º The notification referred to in § 2º of this article shall preferably be made electronically, by sending it to the electronic tax domicile of the
  trading export company.

        § 4º If the trading export company regularizes its situation by fulfilling all the requirements and conditions set out in the caput of art. 82, and
  provided there is no outstanding payment relating to the cases referred to in § 5º of art. 82 of this Complementary Law, the cancellation proceeding referred to in §
  2º of this article shall be extinguished.

        § 5º Default shall be deemed to occur, and the cancellation proceeding shall continue, if the trading export company does not regularize its situation in the
  manner of § 4º nor file the objection referred to in § 2º of this article.

        § 6º Once the objection referred to in § 2º of this article has been filed, the preparing authority shall have a period of 15 (fifteen) days to forward the proceeding for
  judgment.

        § 7º An appeal against the decision cancelling the authorization shall be admissible, to be filed within 20 (twenty) business days, counted from the date of notice of the decision, to the
  IBS Management Committee or to the RFB, according to the tax authority that carried out the cancellation of the authorization under § 1º of this article.

        § 8º The regulation may provide for additional procedural acts complementing the provisions of this article.

                                                                                   TITLE II

                OF SPECIAL CUSTOMS REGIMES AND OF THE REGIMES FOR BAGGAGE, INTERNATIONAL SHIPMENTS AND THE SUPPLY OF
                                        FUEL FOR AIRCRAFT IN INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC

                                                                                  CHAPTER I

                                                                  OF SPECIAL CUSTOMS REGIMES

                                                                                    Section I

                                                                            Of the Transit Regime

        Art. 84. Payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on import is suspended while material goods are subject to the special customs
  regime of customs transit, in any of its forms, observing the discipline set out in customs legislation.

                                                                                    Section II

                                                                          Of the Warehousing Regimes

        Art. 85. Payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on import is suspended while material goods are subject to the special customs regime
  of warehousing, observing the discipline set out in customs legislation.

        Sole paragraph. The regulation shall specify the types of special customs warehousing regimes.

          Art. 86. The provision in the caput of art. 85 of this Complementary Law does not apply to goods admitted under the special customs regime of certified
  bonded warehousing.

        Sole paragraph. Goods admitted under the special customs regime of certified bonded warehousing are considered exported, under the terms of the regulation.

       Art. 87. Payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on import and on acquisition in the domestic market of material goods subject to the special
  customs regime of duty-free shops is suspended, observing the discipline set out in customs legislation.

        Sole paragraph. The regime provided for in the caput applies to the supply of material goods intended for use or on-board consumption, on aircraft
  exclusively in international traffic bound for abroad and delivered in a bonded primary zone or bonded organized port area.

                                                                                   Section III

                                                                 Of the Temporary Stay Regimes

        Art. 88. Payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on import is suspended while material goods are subject to the special customs regime
  of temporary stay in the Country or temporary departure from the Country, observing the discipline set out in customs legislation.

        Sole paragraph. The regulation shall specify the types of special customs regimes for temporary stay.

        Art. 89. In the case of goods temporarily admitted into the Country for economic use, the suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS shall be partial,
  and the IBS and the CBS must be paid proportionally to the length of stay of the goods in the Country.

         § 1º The proportionality referred to in the caput of this article shall be obtained by applying the percentage of 0.033% (thirty-three thousandths of one percent),
  for each day within the period for which the regime is granted, on the amount of the IBS and the CBS originally due.

        § 2º In the event of payment after the date on which it would be due, as set out in item II of the caput of art. 67 of this Complementary Law, the IBS and the CBS
  shall be adjusted by the Selic rate, calculated from that date, without prejudice to the other additions set out in the legislation.

        § 3º The provision in the caput of this article does not apply:

        I - until December 31, 2040:


        a) to goods intended for exploration, development and production activities of oil and natural gas, whose stay in the Country is of a
  temporary nature, listed in a schedule specified in the regulation; and

        b) to goods intended for the transport, handling, transfer, storage or regasification activities of liquefied natural gas,
  listed in a schedule specified in the regulation; and

        II - until the date established by art. 92-A of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, to goods temporarily imported for
  economic use by companies that fall under the provisions of Decree-Law No. 288 of February 28, 1967, during the period of their stay in the Manaus
  Free Trade Zone, which shall be subject to the temporary admission regime with total suspension of payment of the taxes.

        § 4º In the event that the temporary import of aircraft is carried out by a taxpayer under the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS by means of a
  leasing agreement:

       § 4º In the event that the temporary import of aircraft, their components and engines, is carried out by a taxpayer under the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS
  by means of a leasing agreement: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - payment of the IBS and the CBS on the import of the aircraft shall be waived; and

        I - payment of the IBS and the CBS shall be waived; and         (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         II - the IBS and the CBS shall be levied on the payment of the leasing consideration in accordance with the specific regime for
  financial services on imports.

                                                                                    Section IV

                                                                      Of the Improvement Regimes

        Art. 90. Payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on import is suspended while material goods are subject to the special customs regime
  of improvement, observing the discipline set out in customs legislation.

        § 1º The regulation shall specify the types of special customs improvement regimes.

        § 2º The suspension referred to in the caput of this article may extend to material goods that are imported and to those acquired in the domestic market.

        § 3º The regulation shall establish the requirements and conditions for the admission of material goods and services under the special customs regime of drawback, in the
  suspension modality.

        § 4º Material goods subject to the special customs regime of drawback, in the suspension modality, that, in whole or in part:

        I - cease to be used or consumed in the production process of exported final goods, as established in the granting act; or

         II - are used in a manner not in accordance with the granting act, if intended for the domestic market, in the state in which they were imported or acquired or,
  further, incorporated into the aforementioned final goods,

  are subject to payment of the IBS and the CBS.

         § 5º In the case set out in § 4º, if the destination for the domestic market occurs more than 30 (thirty) days after the deadline set for export, the amounts of the
  taxes due shall be increased by penalty and default interest under § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

       § 6º For purposes of the provisions of this Section, the Special Customs Regime of Industrial Bonded Warehouse under Computerized Control (Recof) is considered a special
  customs improvement regime.

        Art. 91. The exemption and refund modalities of the special customs drawback regime do not apply to the IBS and the CBS.

       Art. 92. In the case of national or nationalized goods leaving the Country temporarily for a transformation, processing, finishing or
  assembly operation, or for a repair, maintenance or restoration process, the IBS and the CBS due upon the return of the goods to the Country shall be calculated:

         I - on the difference between the value of the IBS and the CBS levied on the product of the transformation, processing, finishing or assembly operation and the
  value of the IBS and the CBS that would be levied, on the same date, on the goods that left the country, if they were being imported from the same country in which the
  temporary export operation took place; or

        II - on the value of the goods and services used in the repair, maintenance or restoration process.

        Sole paragraph. The regulation may establish other manufacturing operations to which the provisions of the caput of this article apply.

                                                                                     Section V

                                              Of the Special Customs Regime Applicable to the Oil and Gas Sector (Repetro)

        Art. 93. Observing the discipline set out in customs legislation, payment of the IBS and the CBS is suspended in the following operations:

         I - import of goods intended for exploration, development and production activities of oil, natural gas and other fluid hydrocarbons
  provided for in specific legislation, whose stay in the Country is of a temporary nature, listed in a schedule specified in the regulation (Repetro-
  Temporário);

        II - import of goods intended for the transport, handling, transfer, storage or regasification activities of liquefied natural gas
  listed in a schedule specified in the regulation (GNL-Temporário);

        III - import of goods listed in a schedule specified in the regulation whose stay in the Country is definitive and that are intended for the activities referred to
  in item I of this caput (Repetro-Permanente);

        IV - import or acquisition in the domestic market of raw materials, intermediate products and packaging materials to be used entirely in the
  production process of a final product to be supplied to a company that allocates it to the activities referred to in item I of this caput (Repetro-Industrialização);

        V - acquisition of the final product referred to in item IV of this caput (Repetro-Nacional); and

         VI - import or acquisition in the domestic market of goods listed in a schedule specified in the regulation, for the conversion or construction of other goods in
  the Country, contracted by a company based abroad, whose final product must be intended for the activities referred to in item I of this caput (Repetro-Entreposto).

       § 1º The suspension provided for in item III of the caput of this article is prohibited for the import of vessels intended for cabotage navigation and for
  national-route inland navigation, as well as for port support navigation and maritime support navigation, under the terms of specific legislation.

        § 2º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in item III of the caput of this article converts into a zero rate after 5 (five) years have elapsed,
  counted from the date of registration of the import declaration.



         § 3º The beneficiary that carries out an import with suspension of payment under item III of the caput of this article and does not allocate the goods in the manner
  provided for therein within the period of 3 (three) years, counted from the date of registration of the import declaration, is obliged to pay the IBS and the CBS not paid as a result of the
  suspension enjoyed, plus penalty and default interest under § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, calculated from the date the
  respective taxable events occurred.

          § 4º Payment of the IBS and the CBS is also suspended on the import or acquisition of goods in the domestic market by a company called an intermediate
  manufacturer for the manufacturing of an intermediate product to be supplied to a company that uses it in the production process referred to in item IV of the caput of this
  article.

        § 5º Once the supply of the final product has been completed, the suspensions referred to in item IV of the caput and in § 4º of this article convert into a zero rate.

        § 6º Once the allocation of the final product has been completed, the suspension referred to in item V of the caput of this article converts into a zero rate.

         § 7º The beneficiary that carries out the acquisition in the domestic market with suspension of payment under item V of the caput and does not allocate the good to the
  activities referred to in item I of the caput of this article within the period of 3 (three) years, counted from the date of acquisition, is obliged to pay the IBS and the CBS not paid as a result of
  the suspension enjoyed, plus default penalty and adjusted by the Selic rate, calculated from the date the respective taxable
  events occurred.

        § 8º The suspensions of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput of this article shall only apply to taxable events occurring until December 31, 2040.

                                                                                        Section VI

                                                           Of the Baggage and International Shipments Regimes

        Art. 94. Exempt from payment of the IBS and the CBS on import of material goods are:

        I - baggage of travelers and crew members, accompanied or unaccompanied; and

        II - international shipments, provided that:

        a) they are exempt from the Import Tax;

        b) the sender and the recipient are natural persons; and

        c) there was no intermediation by a digital platform.

        Art. 95. In an international shipment in which the simplified taxation regime is applied, under the terms of customs legislation, the supplier of material
  goods of foreign origin, even if resident or domiciled abroad, is jointly and severally liable for the IBS and the CBS and is required to register under the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS,
  observing the provisions of § 2º of art. 21, § 3º of art. 22 and art. 23 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 96. The digital platform, even if domiciled abroad, is responsible for payment of the IBS and the CBS relating to material goods that are the subject of an international
  shipment whose operation or import was carried out through its intermediation, observing the provisions of arts. 22 and 23 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 97. In the cases of arts. 95 and 96 of this Complementary Law, the recipient of an international shipment, even if not the importer, is jointly and severally
  responsible for payment of the IBS and the CBS relating to material goods that are the subject of an international shipment if:

        I - the supplier resident or domiciled abroad is not registered; or

        II - the taxes have not been paid by the supplier resident or domiciled abroad, even if registered, or by a digital platform.

                                                                                        Section VII

                                           Of the Regime for the Supply of Fuel to Aircraft in International Traffic

         Art. 98. The supply of fuel or lubricant for refueling aircraft in international traffic bound for
  abroad is considered an export.

        Sole paragraph. The provision in this article applies only to the refueling of fuel or lubricant carried out exclusively in a bonded primary
  zone or bonded organized port area.

                                                                                    Section VIII
                                                                (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                 Final Provisions

        Art. 98-A. The regulation may provide for cases in which the special customs regimes referred to in arts. 84, 85, 88 and 90 of this Complementary Law
  shall be applied to material goods bound for abroad, including in the case of temporary departure from the Country. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

        Art. 98-B. The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS resulting from the application of a special customs regime converts into a zero rate in the case
  in which the material good is destroyed, under customs control and at the expense of the interested party, as a measure for terminating the application of the regime. (Wording
  given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                    CHAPTER II

                                                             OF EXPORT PROCESSING ZONES

         Art. 99. Imports or acquisitions in the domestic market of machinery, apparatus, instruments and equipment carried out by a company
  authorized to operate in export processing zones shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 1º The suspension referred to in the caput of this article applies only to goods, new or used, necessary for the activities of the company authorized to operate in
  export processing zones, for incorporation into its fixed assets.

       § 2º In the case of import of used goods, the suspension referred to in the caput of this article shall apply when it is an industrial complex that is an
  constitutive element of the paying-up of the company's share capital.

         § 3º In the case of use of goods imported or acquired in the domestic market with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS not in accordance with the
  provisions of §§ 1º and 2º, or of resale of the goods before the conversion of the suspension into a zero rate occurs, in the manner set out in § 4º of this article, the company
  authorized to operate in export processing zones is obliged to pay the IBS and the CBS whose payment remains suspended, plus
  penalty and default interest under § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, calculated from the date the respective taxable events occurred, in the capacity
  of:

        I - taxpayer, with regard to import operations; or

        II - person liable, with regard to acquisitions in the domestic market.
        § 4º If the cases set out in § 3º do not occur, the suspension referred to in the caput of this article shall convert into a zero rate, once the period of 2 (two)
  years has elapsed, counted from the date the taxable event occurred.

         § 5º If payment of the IBS and the CBS is not made in the manner of § 3º of this article, the amounts shall be demanded through an ex officio proceeding, adjusted
  by the Selic rate, and the applicable penalties shall be due.

       Art. 100. Imports or acquisitions in the domestic market of raw materials, intermediate products and packaging materials carried out by
  a company authorized to operate in export processing zones shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 1º The raw materials, intermediate products and packaging materials referred to in the caput of this article must be used entirely in the
  production process of the final product to be exported, without prejudice to the provisions of art. 101 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The suspension referred to in the caput of this article shall convert into a zero rate upon the export of the final product or the provision of services supplied
  or intended exclusively for abroad, observing the provisions of § 4º.

         § 3º Electric energy from renewable generation sources used by companies established in Export Processing Zones is considered a raw
  material for purposes of the caput.

        § 4º Electric energy from renewable generation sources used by service-providing companies established in export processing
  zones shall receive treatment equivalent to that established in the caput for raw materials, intermediate products and packaging materials.

        Art. 101. Manufactured products or products acquired for manufacturing by a company authorized to operate in export processing zones may
  be sold on the domestic market, provided that the legal entity makes payment of:

        I - the IBS and the CBS, as taxpayer, whose payment on imports remains suspended due to the provisions of arts. 99 and 100
  of this Complementary Law, plus default penalty and adjusted by the Selic rate, calculated from the date the respective taxable events occurred;

        II - the IBS and the CBS, as person liable, whose payment relating to acquisitions in the domestic market remains suspended due to the
  provisions of arts. 99 and 100 of this Complementary Law, plus default penalty and adjusted by the Selic rate, calculated from the date the
  respective taxable events occurred;

        III - the IBS and the CBS normally levied on the sale operation.

        Art. 102. The treatment established in arts. 99 and 100 of this Complementary Law applies to acquisitions of machinery, apparatus, instruments,
  equipment, raw materials, intermediate products and packaging materials carried out between companies authorized to operate in export
  processing zones.

        Art. 103. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on transport services are reduced to zero:

        I - for the goods referred to in arts. 99 and 100 of this Complementary Law, up to the export processing zones; and

        II - for goods exported from the export processing zones.

        Art. 104. The provisions of this Chapter shall observe the discipline set out in customs legislation for export processing zones.

                                                                                 CHAPTER III

                                                                   OF THE CAPITAL GOODS REGIMES

                                                                                    Section I

                                    Of the Tax Regime to Incentivize the Modernization and Expansion of Port Infrastructure (Reporto)

         Art. 105. Observing the discipline set out in specific legislation, imports and acquisitions in the domestic market of machinery, equipment, spare parts and other goods
  carried out directly by beneficiaries of the Tax Regime to Incentivize the Modernization and Expansion of Port Infrastructure (Reporto), and intended for their fixed
  assets for exclusive use in the performance of services of:

        I - loading, unloading, storage and handling of merchandise and products, including when carried out in a bonded facility in a secondary zone;

        II - supplementary operational support systems;

        III - environmental protection;

        IV - security and monitoring systems for the flow of people, merchandise, products, vehicles and vessels;

        V - dredging; and

        VI - training and education of workers, including in the establishment of Professional Training Centers,

  shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS.

         § 1º The provision in the caput of this article also applies to goods used in the performance of merchandise transport services by rail, classified
  under headings 86.01, 86.02 and 86.06 of the Mercosur Common Nomenclature based on the Harmonized System (NCM/SH), and to rails and other railway track
  elements, classified under heading 73.02 of the NCM/SH.

        § 2º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput of this article converts into a zero rate after 5 (five) years have elapsed, counted from the date
  the respective taxable events occurred.

        § 3º The transfer, on any grounds, of ownership of goods imported or acquired in the domestic market under Reporto, within the period of 5 (five)
  years, counted from the date the respective taxable events occurred, must be preceded by authorization of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB and by payment of the
  IBS and the CBS whose payment was suspended, plus penalty and default interest under § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

         § 4º The transfer referred to in § 3º of this article, previously authorized by the IBS Management Committee and the RFB, to another Reporto beneficiary shall be
  carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS, provided that the acquirer assumes responsibility, from the moment the respective taxable events
  occurred, for the IBS and the CBS whose payment was suspended.

        § 5º The goods benefiting from the suspension referred to in the caput and in § 1º of this article shall be listed in the regulation.

        § 6º The spare parts referred to in the caput must have a value equal to or greater than 20% (twenty percent) of the value of the machine or equipment to which they
  are intended, according to the respective import declaration or invoice.

        § 7º Reporto beneficiaries may carry out imports and acquisitions in the domestic market covered by the regime until December 31, 2028.

        § 8º Legal entities opting for Simples Nacional may not join Reporto.

                                                                                    Section II


                                             Of the Special Incentive Regime for the Development of Infrastructure (Reidi)

         Art. 106. Observing the discipline set out in specific legislation, imports and acquisitions in the domestic market of new machinery, apparatus, instruments and
  equipment, and of construction materials, carried out directly by beneficiaries of the Special Incentive Regime for the Development of Infrastructure (Reidi) for use or
  incorporation into infrastructure works intended for fixed assets, shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 1º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput of this article also applies to:

        I - the import of services intended for infrastructure works for incorporation into fixed assets;

        II - the acquisition in the domestic market of services intended for infrastructure works for incorporation into fixed assets; and

        III - the lease of machinery, apparatus, instruments and equipment intended for infrastructure works for incorporation into fixed assets.

        § 2º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput and in § 1º of this article converts into a zero rate after the use or incorporation of the
  good, construction material or service into the infrastructure work.

        § 3º A Reidi beneficiary that does not use or incorporate the good, construction material or service into the infrastructure work is obliged to pay the IBS and the
  CBS whose payment remains suspended, plus penalty and default interest under § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, calculated from
  the date the respective taxable events occurred, in the capacity of:

        I - taxpayer, with regard to import operations of material goods; or

        II - person liable, with regard to services, leases or acquisitions of material goods in the domestic market.

         § 4º The benefits provided for in this article also apply in the event that, in accordance with applicable accounting standards, the revenues of legal entities
  holding public service concession contracts, recognized during the execution of infrastructure works eligible for Reidi, have as counterpart a contract asset, an intangible asset
  representing a right of exploration, or a financial asset representing an unconditional contractual right to receive cash or another financial asset, extending, including,
  to ongoing projects already authorized before the RFB.

        § 5º The benefits provided for in this article may be enjoyed for imports and acquisitions in the domestic market carried out within a period of 5 (five) years,
  counted from the date of authorization under Reidi of the legal entity holding the infrastructure project.

        § 6º Legal entities opting for Simples Nacional may not join Reidi.

         § 7º The tax benefits of the special regime dealt with in this article also apply to beneficiaries of the Special Incentive Regime for the
  Production of Low Carbon Emission Hydrogen (Rehidro), established by Law No. 14,948 of August 2, 2024, observing the discipline set out in
  specific legislation. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section III

                                                       Of the Tax Regime to Incentivize Naval Activity - Renaval

       Art. 107. The Tax Regime to Incentivize Naval Economic Activity - Renaval allows previously authorized beneficiaries to suspend the
  payment of IBS and CBS:

         I - on the supply of vessels registered or pre-registered in the Special Brazilian Registry - REB established by art. 11 of Law No. 9,432 of January
  8, 1997, for incorporation into the fixed assets of an acquirer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS;

        II - on imports and acquisitions in the domestic market of machinery, equipment and vehicles intended for use in the activities referred to in item III,
  carried out for incorporation into their fixed assets; and

        III - on imports and acquisitions in the domestic market of raw materials, intermediate products, parts, pieces and components for use in the
  construction, maintenance, modernization and repair of vessels pre-registered or registered in the REB.

        § 1º Only taxpayers subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS that primarily carry out the activities of construction, maintenance, modernization
  and repair of vessels may be authorized as Renaval beneficiaries, under the terms of the regulation.

        § 2º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput of this article converts into a zero rate after:

        I - 12 (twelve) months of the good remaining in the fixed assets of the acquirer, in the case of item I of the caput;

        II - 5 (five) years of the good remaining in the fixed assets of the acquirer, in the case of item II of the caput; and

        III - incorporation or consumption in the activities referred to in item III of the caput.

        § 3º A Renaval beneficiary that does not meet the condition established in items I to III of the caput is obliged to pay the suspended IBS and CBS, with the
  additions referred to in § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, calculated from the date the respective taxable events occurred, in the capacity of:

        I - taxpayer, with regard to import operations of material goods; or

        II - person liable, with regard to operations in the domestic market.

       § 4º The provision in § 3º applies to a beneficiary that transfers, on any grounds, ownership of goods imported or acquired in the domestic market under
  the coverage of Renaval before conversion into a zero rate.

        § 5º For purposes of this article, goods and services of the same nature that, as a result of applicable accounting standards, are recorded by
  public service concessionaires as a contract, intangible or financial asset shall also be considered as goods incorporated into fixed assets.

                                                                                      Section IV

                                                               Of the Relief from Taxation on the Acquisition of Capital Goods

        Art. 108. Full and immediate credit of the IBS and the CBS is assured, in the manner set out in arts. 47 to 56, on the acquisition of capital goods.

        Art. 109. A joint act of the Federal Executive Branch and the IBS Management Committee may define cases in which imports and acquisitions in the domestic market
  of capital goods by a taxpayer under the regular regime shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS, in which case the provision of art. 108 of this
  Complementary Law does not apply.

        § 1º The joint act referred to in the caput of this article shall specify the goods covered and the term of the benefit.

        § 2º The suspension of payment of the IBS and the CBS provided for in the caput of this article converts into a zero rate after the incorporation of the good into the fixed
  assets of the acquirer, observing the term referred to in § 1º of this article.
        § 3º A beneficiary that does not incorporate the good into its fixed assets is obliged to pay the IBS and the CBS whose payment remains suspended,
  plus penalty and default interest in the manner of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, calculated from the date the respective taxable events occurred,
  in the capacity of:

        I - taxpayer, with regard to imports; or

        II - person liable, with regard to acquisitions in the domestic market.

       § 4º The provision in this article also applies to legal entities opting for Simples Nacional registered under the regular regime referred to in this
  Complementary Law.

        Art. 110. The rates of the IBS and the CBS are reduced to zero on the supply and import:

        I - of tractors, machinery and agricultural implements, intended for a non-taxpayer rural producer referred to in art. 164; and

        II - of cargo transport vehicles intended for a self-employed natural-person cargo carrier who is a non-taxpayer, referred to in art. 169.

        Sole paragraph. The provision in this article applies to the capital goods listed in the regulation.

       Art. 111. For purposes of this Section, goods of the same nature that, as a result of applicable accounting standards, are recorded by
  public service concessionaires as a contract, intangible or financial asset shall also be considered as goods incorporated into fixed assets.

                                                                                      TITLE III

                            OF THE PERSONALIZED REFUND OF THE IBS AND THE CBS (CASHBACK) AND OF THE NATIONAL BASIC FOOD BASKET

                                                                                      CHAPTER I

                                                       OF THE PERSONALIZED REFUND OF THE IBS AND THE CBS (CASHBACK)

        Art. 112. The following shall be refunded, under the terms and limits set out in this Chapter, to natural persons who are members of low-income
  families:

        I - the CBS, by the Union; and

        II - the IBS, by the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities.

        Art. 113. The recipient of the refunds provided for in this Chapter shall be the person responsible for a family unit of a low-income family registered in the
  Single Registry for Federal Government Social Programs (CadÚnico), under art. 6º-F of Law No. 8,742 of December 7, 1993, or an equivalent rule
  that supersedes it, and who cumulatively meets the following requirements:

        I - have a monthly per capita family income of up to half the national minimum wage;

        II - reside in national territory; and

        III - hold a registration in regular status in the CPF (individual taxpayer registry).

        § 1º The recipient shall be automatically included in the refund system, and may, at any time, request their exclusion.

        § 2º Personal data collected under the refund system shall be processed in the manner set out in Law No. 13,709 of August 14, 2018 (General Personal Data
  Protection Law), and art. 198 of Law No. 5,172 of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code), and may only be used or transferred to public
  administration bodies or, in anonymized form, to research institutes for the execution of actions related to the refunds.

        Art. 114. The refund of the CBS referred to in item I of the caput of art. 112 of this Complementary Law shall be managed by the RFB, which shall be responsible for:

        I - regulating, coordinating, controlling and supervising its execution;

        II - defining the procedures for determining the amount and the system for payment of the refunded amounts;

        III - preparing management and accountability reports relating to the refunded amounts; and

        IV - adopting other actions and initiatives necessary for operationalizing the refund.

        § 1º The regulation referred to in item I of the caput of this article shall define, in particular:

        I - the assessment period for the refund;

        II - the calendar and frequency of payment;

        III - the forms of crediting to the recipient natural persons;

        IV - the manner of reimbursement of amounts wrongly received by natural persons;

        V - the mechanisms for mitigating fraud or errors;

        VI - the treatment in relation to indications of irregularities;

        VII - the forms of transparency relating to the distribution of the refunds; and

        VIII - the deadline for use of the refunds, which may not exceed 24 (twenty-four) months.

          § 2º The procedures adopted for payment of the refunds shall prioritize mechanisms that encourage the formalization of consumption by the
  recipient families, by means of the issuance of tax documents, so as to encourage tax citizenship and mitigate informality in economic activities, tax
  evasion and unfair competition.

         Art. 115. The refund of the IBS referred to in item II of the caput of art. 112 shall be managed by the IBS Management Committee, which shall have the powers set out
  in art. 114 of this Complementary Law, respecting the specificities.

        Art. 116. The tax refunds provided for in this Chapter shall be granted at the time defined in the regulation.

         § 1º In the case of household supply of electric energy, water supply, sanitary sewage and piped gas, and of the supply of
  telecommunications services, the refunds shall be granted at the time of billing.

      § 2º In the case of the supply of goods or services subject to billing at a fixed frequency, the refunds shall preferably be granted at the
  time of billing.


         § 3º The amounts shall be made available to the financial agent within a maximum period of 15 (fifteen) days after the assessment, observing the provision in item I of § 1º
  of art. 114 and in art. 115 of this Complementary Law.

        § 4º The financial agent must transfer the amounts to the recipient families within 10 (ten) days after the amounts are made available, as referred to in § 3º of this article.

        § 5º (VETOED).      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 117. The refunds provided for in this Chapter shall be calculated by applying a percentage to the value of the tax relating to consumption, formalized
  by means of the issuance of tax documents.

         § 1º The regulation shall establish refund rules by recipient family unit and by refund assessment period, so that the refund
  is compatible with the family's disposable income.

        § 2º To determine the tax to be refunded to natural persons, under the terms of the caput and § 1º of this article, the following shall be considered:

       I - the total consumption of products by the recipient families, excluding products subject to the Selective Tax, referred to in Book II of this
  Complementary Law;

        I - the total consumption of goods and services by the recipient families, excluding goods and services subject to the Selective Tax, referred to in Book II of this
  Complementary Law;      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - data extracted from tax documents linked to the CPF of members of the family unit, covering acquisition operations of goods or services
  exclusively for household consumption;

         III - the disposable monthly family income, understood as that resulting from the sum of the income declared in CadÚnico plus amounts received as
  conditional cash transfer;

        IV - data extracted from official publications relating to the consumption structure of families;

        V - the tax rules for goods and services set out in the legislation.

        Art. 118. The percentage to be applied under art. 117 of this Complementary Law shall be:

        I - 100% (one hundred percent) for the CBS and 20% (twenty percent) for the IBS on the acquisition of a bottle of up to 13 kg (thirteen kilograms) of liquefied
  petroleum gas, in household supply operations of electric energy, water supply, sanitary sewage and piped gas, and in telecommunications
  supply operations; and

        II - 20% (twenty percent) for the CBS and the IBS, in the other cases.

        § 1º The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities may, by specific law, set refund percentages for their share of the CBS or the IBS
  higher than those set out in items I and II of the caput, which may be differentiated:

        I - according to the family income of the recipients, observing the provision in art. 113 of this Complementary Law;

        II - between the cases set out in items I and II of the caput.

        § 2º In the absence of the setting of own percentages, the refunds provided for in this Chapter shall be calculated by applying the percentages referred to
  in items I and II of the caput.

        § 3º The provision in § 1º of this article does not apply to the CBS refund percentage referred to in item I of the caput.

       Art. 119. Exceptionally, in localities with operational difficulties that compromise the effectiveness of the tax refund under art. 117 of this
  Complementary Law, simplified procedures may be adopted for calculating the refunds.

         § 1º The simplified procedure referred to in this article does not apply to refunds granted at the time of billing of the operation, under the terms of §§ 1º
  and 2º of art. 116 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º For purposes of the provision in the caput of this article, the following sequence of calculations shall be observed, respecting the income brackets of the
  recipient families:

         I - determination of the tax burden borne in the different income brackets, understood as the product of the estimated monthly consumption of goods and
  services by the corresponding rates;

        II - determination of the tax pressure in the different income brackets, obtained by the ratio between the tax burden borne, under
  item I of this paragraph, and the estimated average monthly income, expressed as a percentage;

         III - determination of the tax burden borne at the family unit level in the different income brackets, which consists of the multiplication of the tax
  pressure of the income bracket by the disposable monthly income of the recipient family, under item III of § 2º of art. 117 of this Complementary Law;

         IV - determination of the monthly refund amount at the family unit level, which results from the multiplication of the tax burden borne at the family unit
  level by the refund percentage set under art. 118 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3º Data relating to consumption of goods and services and average income referred to, respectively, in items I and II of § 2º of this article, shall
  be estimated based on the information from the most recent Household Budget Survey (POF), produced by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics Foundation (IBGE),
  based on a methodology defined in the regulation.

          § 4º The definition of localities with operational difficulties referred to in the caput of this article shall take into account the degree of effectiveness of the tax
  refund, by means of an evaluation methodology defined in the regulation.

         Art. 120. Under no circumstances may the portion credited individually to the beneficiary family under this Chapter exceed the tax burden borne
  relating to the CBS, in the case of the refund referred to in item I of the caput of art. 112, and the tax burden borne relating to the IBS, in the case of the refund referred to
  in item II of the caput of art. 112 of this Complementary Law, levied on the families' consumption.

       Sole paragraph. For purposes of the provision in the caput of this article, the tax burden borne by the recipient families may be assessed based on
  tax documents issued or by the calculation procedures detailed in art. 119 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 121. Refunds of taxes to natural persons referred to in this Chapter shall be deducted from tax collection, by means of cancellation of the corresponding revenue.

         Art. 122. The Union, through the RFB, and the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, through the IBS Management Committee, may implement
  integrated solutions for the administration of a system that enables unified refund of the portions referred to in items I and II of the caput of art. 112 of this
  Complementary Law.

        Sole paragraph. Integrated administration includes the exercise of the powers set out in arts. 114 and 115 of this Complementary Law, under the terms of a specific
  agreement for that purpose.


        Art. 123. The refunds provided for in art. 112 of this Complementary Law shall be calculated based on family consumption carried out as of:

        I - January 2027, for the CBS; and

        II - January 2029, for the IBS.

        Art. 124. For the purposes of this Complementary Law, the following are understood as:

       I - general refund to natural persons of the IBS or the CBS, the amount determined by applying the percentages established in art. 118 of this
  Complementary Law;

        II - specific refund to natural persons of the IBS or the CBS, the difference between the amount determined by applying the percentages set by the
  federative entities under art. 118 of this Complementary Law and the amount referred to in item I of this caput.

         Sole paragraph. The general refund referred to in item I of the caput of this article shall be taken into account for purposes of calculating the reference rates, with
  a view to rebalancing the tax collection of the respective federative spheres.

                                                                                   CHAPTER II

                                                                 OF THE NATIONAL BASIC FOOD BASKET

        Art. 125. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on sales of products intended for human consumption listed in
  Annex I of this Complementary Law, with the specification of the corresponding NCM/SH classifications, that make up the National Basic Food Basket, created under the
  terms of art. 8º of Constitutional Amendment No. 132 of December 20, 2023, are reduced to zero.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of §§ 1º and 2º of art. 126 of this Complementary Law apply to the rate reductions referred to in the caput of this article.

                                                                                    TITLE IV

                                                              OF THE DIFFERENTIATED REGIMES OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

                                                                                   CHAPTER I

                                                                             GENERAL PROVISIONS

         Art. 126. Differentiated regimes of the IBS and the CBS are hereby established, uniformly throughout the national territory, as set out in this Title, with
  the application of reduced rates or the granting of presumed credits, ensuring the corresponding adjustments to the reference rates of the IBS and the CBS,
  with a view to rebalancing tax collection.

         § 1º Provided the applicable requirements are met, the differentiated regimes referred to in this Chapter apply, as applicable, to the import of the goods and services
  provided for therein.

        § 2º The alteration of operations with goods or services benefited by the differentiated regimes referred to in this Chapter, by means of addition, exclusion
  or substitution, shall only take effect after compliance with the provisions of §§ 9º and 11 of art. 156-A of the Federal Constitution.

        § 3º The provision in § 2º of this article does not apply to the cases dealt with in § 2º of art. 131, § 2º of art. 132, art. 134, § 10 of art. 138, § 2º of art.
  144, § 2º of art. 145 and § 3º of art. 146 of this Complementary Law, provided that their effects, considered jointly for each review period, do not result in an
  increase of more than 0.02 (two hundredths) of a percentage point in the reference rate of the CBS, the state reference rate of the IBS or the
  municipal reference rate of the IBS.

         § 4º The rate reductions referred to in this Title shall be applied to the standard rates of the IBS and the CBS of each federative entity, set under the
  terms of art. 14 of this Complementary Law.

        § 5º The appropriation of the presumed credits provided for in this Title is conditioned on:

        I - the issuance of an electronic tax document relating to the operation by the acquirer, identifying the respective supplier; and

        II - actual payment to the supplier.

        § 6º The provision in § 1º of this article does not apply to international shipments subject to the Simplified Taxation Regime (RTS), except in the case of
  finished products belonging to classes of medicines imported by a natural person for their own or individual use. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

                                                                                   CHAPTER II

                                                   OF THE THIRTY PERCENT REDUCTION OF THE RATES OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

        Art. 127. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on the provision of services by the following professionals, who carry out intellectual activities of a
  scientific, literary or artistic nature, subject to oversight by a professional council, are reduced by 30% (thirty percent):

        I - administrators;

        II - lawyers;

        III - architects and urban planners;

        IV - social workers;

        V - librarians;

        VI - biologists;

        VII - accountants;

        VIII - economists;

        IX - home economists;

        X - physical education professionals;

        XI - engineers and agronomists;

        XII - statisticians;

        XIII - veterinarians and animal scientists;
        XIV - museologists;

        XV - chemists;

        XVI - public relations professionals;

        XVII - industrial technicians; and

        XVIII - agricultural technicians.

        § 1º The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies to the provision of services carried out by:

        I - a natural person, provided that the services rendered are linked to the professional's qualification; and

        II - a legal entity that cumulatively meets the following requirements:

         a) the partners hold professional qualifications directly related to the corporate purpose and are subject to oversight by a professional
  council;

        b) does not have a legal entity as a partner;

        c) is not a partner of another legal entity;

        d) does not carry out activity other than the professional qualifications of the partners; and

        e) the services related to the core activity are rendered directly by the partners, with the assistance of aides or collaborators being permitted.

        § 2º For purposes of item II of § 1º of this article, the following do not prevent the rate reduction referred to in this article:

        I - the legal form of the company;

         II - the union of different professionals referred to in items I to XVIII of the caput of this article, provided that each partner's activity is within their professional
  qualification; and

        III - the manner of distribution of profits.

        § 3º §§ 1º and 2º of this article do not apply to the provision of services related to the profession in item X of the caput of this article carried out by a legal entity,
  provided it is subject to oversight by a professional council.

                                                                                    CHAPTER III

                                                   OF THE SIXTY PERCENT REDUCTION OF THE RATES OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

                                                                                       Section I

                                                                                General Provisions

        Art. 128. Provided the definitions and other provisions of this Chapter are observed, the rates of the IBS and the
  CBS levied on operations involving the following are reduced by 60% (sixty percent):

        I - education services;

        II - health services;

        III - medical devices;

        IV - accessibility devices for persons with disabilities;

        V - medicines;

        VI - foods intended for human consumption;

        VII - personal hygiene and cleaning products predominantly consumed by low-income families;

        VIII - fresh (in natura) agricultural, aquaculture, fishing, forestry and plant extractivism products;

        IX - agricultural and aquaculture inputs;

        X - national artistic, cultural, event, journalistic and audiovisual productions;

        XI - institutional communication;

        XII - sports activities; and

        XIII - goods and services related to sovereignty and national security, information security and cybersecurity.

                                                                                       Section II

                                                                            Of Education Services

        Art. 129. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the education services listed
  in Annex II to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective classifications under the Brazilian Nomenclature of Services, Intangibles and Other Transactions that
  Produce Changes in Net Worth (NBS).

        Sole paragraph. The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article:

        I - applies only to the amounts owed as consideration for the services listed in Annex II to this Complementary Law; and

        II - does not apply to other transactions that may occur within the schools, institutions or establishments of the service supplier.

                                                                                       Section III

                                                                              Health Services



       Art. 130. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the health services listed in
  Annex III to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NBS classifications.

       Sole paragraph. Amounts disallowed by the medical audit of health assistance plans and not paid do not form part of the IBS and CBS tax base for the health services referred to in the caput of this article.

                                                                                    Section IV

                                                                          Medical Devices

        Art. 131. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the medical devices listed
  in Annex IV to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to the devices listed in Annex IV to this Complementary Law that are regularized
  before the National Health Surveillance Agency (Anvisa).

        § 2 Without prejudice to the five-year review referred to in Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law, the Minister of State for Finance and the
  IBS Management Committee, after consulting the Ministry of Health, shall review, every 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, by joint act, the list referred to in Annex IV to this Complementary
  Law, solely for the purpose of including medical devices that did not exist on the date of publication of the previous review and that serve the same purposes
  as those already included in that annex.

                                                                                    Section V

                                                Accessibility Devices for Persons with Disabilities

         Art. 132. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of accessibility devices
  for persons with disabilities listed in Annex V to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to the accessibility devices listed in Annex V to this Complementary Law
  that meet the requirements set out in a rule issued by the competent public agency.

          § 2 Without prejudice to the five-year review referred to in Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law, the Minister of State for Finance and the
  IBS Management Committee, after consulting the competent public agency, shall review, every 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, by joint act, the list referred to in Annex V to this
  Complementary Law, solely for the purpose of including accessibility devices that did not exist on the date of publication of the previous review and that serve the same
  purposes as those already included in that annex.

                                                                                    Section VI

                                                                              Medicines

        Art. 133. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of medicines registered with
  Anvisa or produced by compounding pharmacies are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), except for medicines subject to the zero rate referred to in art. 146 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article also applies to transactions involving the supply of formulations for enteral and parenteral nutrition,
  special formulations and nutritional formulas intended for persons with inborn errors of metabolism listed in Annex VI to this Complementary Law, with the
  specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

         § 2 In order to ensure that the reduction in tax burden is passed through to prices, the reduction referred to in this article applies only to medicines
  industrialized or imported by legal entities that have entered into a conduct adjustment agreement with the Federal Government and the IBS Management Committee, or that
  comply with the system established by the Drug Market Regulation Chamber (CMED), as provided by law.

          Art. 134. Without prejudice to the five-year review referred to in Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law, the Minister of State for Finance and the
  IBS Management Committee, after consulting the Ministry of Health, shall review, every 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, by joint act, the list referred to in Annex VI, solely
  for the purpose of including formulations referred to in § 1 of art. 133 of this Complementary Law that did not exist on the date of publication of the previous review and that serve the same
  purposes as those already covered.

                                                                                   Section VII

                                                              Food Intended for Human Consumption

       Art. 135. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of food intended for human
  consumption listed in Annex VII to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

                                                                                   Section VIII

                                Personal Hygiene and Cleaning Products Predominantly Consumed by Low-Income Families

        Art. 136. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the personal hygiene and
  cleaning products listed in Annex VIII to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

                                                                                    Section IX

                                    Agricultural, Aquaculture, Fishing, Forestry and Plant Extractive Products In Natura

       Art. 137. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of agricultural, aquaculture,
  fishing, forestry and plant extractive products in natura are reduced by 60% (sixty percent).

        § 1 A product is considered in natura when it is in the state in which it is found in nature, has not undergone any industrialization process nor
  been packaged for presentation, and does not lose that status merely by having undergone:

        I - drying, cleaning, threshing of grains or de-stoning; and

        II - freezing, cooling or simple packaging, when such procedures are intended solely for transport, storage or
  display for sale.

        § 2 The regulation shall provide for products that will not lose their in natura status when they require packaging in preservation packaging,
  with the addition of concentrates or preservatives to maintain the integrity and characteristics of the product.

        § 3 For the purposes of this article's caput, the supply of a forestry product is deemed to include the supply of environmental services of
  conservation or recovery of native vegetation, even when supplied in the form of sustainable management of agricultural, agroforestry and
  agrosilvopastoral systems, in accordance with the definitions and requirements of specific legislation.

                                                                                    Section X

                                                                  Agricultural and Aquaculture Inputs
         Art. 138. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the agricultural and aquaculture inputs
  listed in Annex IX to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH and NBS classifications.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to the products referred to in Annex IX to this Complementary Law that, when required,
  are registered as agricultural or aquaculture inputs with the competent agency of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock.

        § 2 Payment of the IBS and CBS levied on the following transactions with agricultural and aquaculture inputs referred to in the caput is deferred:

        I - supply made by a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime to:

        a) a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime; and

         b) a rural producer that is not an IBS and CBS taxpayer who uses the inputs in the production of goods sold to acquirers entitled to appropriate the
  presumed credits established by art. 168 of this Complementary Law; and

        II - importation carried out by:

        a) a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime; and

         b) a rural producer that is not an IBS and CBS taxpayer who uses the inputs in the production of goods sold to acquirers entitled to appropriate the
  presumed credits established by art. 168 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3 The deferral referred to in item "b" of item I and item "b" of item II, both of § 2, shall apply only to the portion of inputs used
  by the rural producer that is not an IBS and CBS taxpayer in the production of goods sold to acquirers entitled to appropriate the presumed credits
  established by art. 168 of this Complementary Law.

        § 4 (VETOED).

        § 5 In the cases provided for in item "a" of item I and item "a" of item II, both of § 2 of this article, the deferral shall end if:

        I - the supply of the agricultural or aquaculture input, or of the product resulting therefrom:

        a) is not covered by the deferral; or

        b) is exempt, not taxed, including by reason of suspension of payment, or subject to a zero rate; or

        II - the transaction is carried out without issuance of the tax document.

        § 6 Payment of the IBS and CBS relating to the deferral shall be made by the taxpayer that carries out the transaction that ends the deferral phase,
  even if not taxed, as provided in §§ 7 and 8 of this article.

        § 7 In the case referred to in item "a" of item I of § 5 of this article, the incidence of the IBS and CBS shall follow the rules applicable to the taxed transaction.

        § 8 In the case referred to in item "b" of item I of § 5 of this article, payment of the IBS and CBS is waived if credit appropriation is permitted,
  under the terms provided in arts. 47 to 56.

        § 9 In the cases provided for in item "b" of item I and item "b" of item II, both of § 2 of this article, the deferral shall end by means of:

        I - the reduction of the amount of the IBS and CBS presumed credits established by art. 168, as provided in § 3 of that article; or

        II - (VETOED).

         § 10. Without prejudice to the five-year review referred to in Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law, the Minister of State for Finance and the
  IBS Management Committee, after consulting the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, shall review, every 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, by joint act, the list referred to in Annex
  IX, solely for the purpose of including inputs referred to in the caput of this article that serve the same purposes as those already covered and products intended for
  exclusive use in the manufacture of agricultural pesticides.

                                                                                          Section XI

                                           National Artistic, Cultural, Event, Journalistic and Audiovisual Productions

          Art. 139. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the goods and services listed in Annex X
  to this Complementary Law are reduced by 60% (sixty percent), with the specification of the respective NCM/SH and NBS classifications, in cases related to the following national
  artistic, cultural, event, journalistic and audiovisual productions:

        I - theatrical, circus and dance performances;

        II - musical shows;

        III - carnival or folk parades;

        IV - academic and scientific events, such as congresses, conferences and symposiums;

        V - trade fairs;

        VI - exhibitions, fairs, galleries and cultural, artistic and literary shows;

        VII - talk shows or news programs, films, documentaries, series, soap operas, interviews and music videos; and

        VIII - works of art.

          § 1 The provisions of items I, II, III and VII of the caput of this article apply only to productions made in the country that predominantly contain
  artistic, musical, literary or journalistic works by Brazilian authors or performed predominantly by Brazilian artists.

        § 2 In the case of cinematographic or video-phonographic works referred to in item VII of the caput of this article, a national production is considered to be one that
  meets the requirements for national audiovisual works defined in specific legislation.

        § 3 The supply of works of art referred to in item VIII of the caput of this article covers only those produced by Brazilian artists.

                                                                                          Section XII

                                                                             Institutional Communication

          Art. 140. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the following institutional
  communication services to the direct public administration, government agencies and public foundations are reduced by 60% (sixty percent):
          I - services aimed at the planning, creation, programming and maintenance of public administration webpages, at monitoring and managing
  its social media, and at optimizing pages and digital channels for search engines and producing messages, infographics, interactive panels and
  institutional content;

         II - press relations services, which bring together organizational strategies to promote and reinforce communication between the contracting bodies and entities
  and their target audiences, through interaction with press professionals; and

        III - public relations services, which comprise the planned, cohesive and continuous communication effort aimed at establishing an adequate
  perception of the institutional actions and objectives, through the promotion of mutual understanding and the maintenance of relationship standards and
  information flows between the contracting bodies and entities and their target audiences, in the country and abroad.

       Sole paragraph. Suppliers of institutional communication services are subject to the standard rate in relation to services supplied to acquirers
  not mentioned in the caput of this article.

                                                                                      Section XIII

                                                                           Sports Activities

        Art. 141. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the following transactions related to sports
  activities are reduced by 60% (sixty percent):

        I - supply of sports education services, classified under NBS code 1.2205.12.00;

         II - management and operation of sport by associations and sports clubs affiliated with the state or federal agency responsible for coordinating sports,
  including through the sale of tickets to sporting events, the supply, whether for consideration or not, of goods and services, including tickets, through fan
  membership programs, the assignment of athletes' sporting rights, and the transfer of athletes to another sporting entity or their return to activity at another sporting
  entity.

                                                                                      Section XIV

                                     Sovereignty and National Security, Information Security and Cybersecurity

        Art. 142. The IBS and CBS rates on the following are reduced by 60% (sixty percent):

        I - supply to the direct public administration, government agencies and public foundations of the services and goods relating to sovereignty and national
  security, information security and cybersecurity listed in Annex XI to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NBS and
  NCM/SH classifications; and

        II - transactions and provision of information security and cybersecurity services developed by a company with a Brazilian partner holding a
  minimum of 20% (twenty percent) of its share capital, listed in Annex XI to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NBS
  and NCM/SH classifications.

       II - supply of information security and cybersecurity services developed by a company with a Brazilian partner holding a minimum of
  20% (twenty percent) of its share capital, listed in Annex XI to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NBS classifications.
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                     CHAPTER IV

                                                           REDUCTION TO ZERO OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES

                                                                                       Section I

                                                                                General Provisions

        Art. 143. Provided the definitions and other provisions of this Chapter are observed, the IBS and CBS rates levied on
  transactions with the following goods and services are reduced to zero:

        I - medical devices;

        II - accessibility devices for persons with disabilities;

        III - medicines;

        IV - basic menstrual health care products;

        V - vegetables, fruit and eggs;

        VI - passenger automobiles acquired by persons with disabilities or with autism spectrum disorder;

        VII - passenger automobiles acquired by professional drivers who dedicate the automobile to use in the rental category (taxi); and

        VIII - services provided by a non-profit Scientific, Technological and Innovation Institution (ICT).

                                                                                       Section II

                                                                            Medical Devices

        Art. 144. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the medical devices listed below are reduced to zero:

        I - in Annex XII to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications; and

        II - in Annex IV to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications, when acquired by:

        a) direct public administration bodies, government agencies and public foundations; and

        b) health entities immune to the IBS and CBS that hold a Charitable Social Assistance Entity Certificate (CEBAS) for proving the
  provision of services to the SUS (Unified Health System), under the terms of arts. 9 to 11 of Complementary Law No. 187 of December 16, 2021.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to the devices listed in Annexes IV and XII to this Complementary Law that
  meet the requirements set out in an Anvisa rule.

        § 2 The provisions of § 2 of art. 131 of this Complementary Law apply to the products covered by this Section.

       § 3 In the event of a public health emergency recognized by the competent federal, state, Federal District or municipal Legislative Branch, a joint act of the Minister
  of State for Finance and the IBS Management Committee may be issued, at any time, to include devices not listed in Annex XII to this
  Complementary Law, with the validity of the benefit limited to the period and locality of the public health emergency.

                                                                                      Section III

                                                   Accessibility Devices for Persons with Disabilities

         Art. 145. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of accessibility devices for persons with
  disabilities listed below are reduced to zero:

          I - in Annex XIII to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications; and

          II - in Annex V to this Complementary Law, with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications, when acquired by:

          a) direct public administration bodies, government agencies and public foundations; and

       b) health entities immune to the IBS and CBS that hold CEBAS for proving the provision of services to the SUS, under the terms of arts. 9 to 11 of Complementary
  Law No. 187 of 2021.

       § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to the accessibility devices listed in Annexes V and XIII to this
  Complementary Law that meet the requirements set out in a rule issued by the competent public agency.

          § 2 The provisions of § 2 of art. 132 of this Complementary Law apply to the products covered by this Section.

                                                                                      Section IV

                                                                                  Medicines

         Art. 146. The IBS and CBS rates on the supply of the medicines listed in Annex XIV to this Complementary Law,
  with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications, are reduced to zero.
         § 1 The IBS and CBS rates on the supply of medicines registered with Anvisa are also reduced to zero when acquired by:
         I - direct public administration bodies, government agencies and public foundations; and
         II - health entities immune to the IBS and CBS that hold CEBAS for proving the provision of services to the SUS, under the terms of arts. 9 to 11 of Complementary
  Law No. 187 of 2021.
         § 2 The rate reduction referred to in the caput of this article also applies to the supply of formulations for enteral and parenteral nutrition,
  special formulations and nutritional formulas intended for persons with inborn errors of metabolism listed in Annex VI to this Complementary Law, with the
  specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications, when acquired by the bodies and entities mentioned in the items of § 1 of this article.
         § 3 Without prejudice to the five-year review referred to in Chapter I of Title III of Book III of this Complementary Law, the head of the Federal Executive Branch and the
  IBS Management Committee, after consulting the Ministry of Health, may issue a joint act annually to review the list referred to in Annex XIV to this Complementary Law,
  solely for the purpose of including medicines that did not exist on the date of publication of the previous review and that serve the same purposes as those
  included in that annex and whose price limits have already been established by CMED.
         § 4 In the event of a public health emergency recognized by the competent federal, state, Federal District or municipal Legislative Branch, a joint act of the Minister
  of State for Finance and the IBS Management Committee may be issued, at any time, to include medicines not listed in Annex XIV to this
  Complementary Law, with the validity of the benefit limited to the period and locality of the public health emergency.

        Art. 146. The IBS and CBS rates on the supply of medicines registered with Anvisa are reduced to zero, provided they are intended,
  according to the health registration, for:   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - rare diseases;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - neglected diseases;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - oncology;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          IV - diabetes;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          V - HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs);       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          VI - cardiovascular diseases; and      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          VII - the Popular Pharmacy Program of Brazil or equivalent.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1 The IBS and CBS rates on the supply of medicines registered with Anvisa are also reduced to zero when:               (Wording given
  by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - acquired by direct public administration bodies, government agencies and public foundations;          (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

         II - acquired by health entities immune to the IBS and CBS that hold Cebas for proving the provision of services to the SUS, under the terms of
  arts. 9 to 11 of Complementary Law No. 187 of December 16, 2021; or (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - classified as serums or vaccines, in accordance with specific health regulations.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2 The rate reduction referred to in the caput of this article also applies to the supply of formulations for enteral and parenteral nutrition,
  special formulations and nutritional formulas intended for persons with inborn errors of metabolism listed in Annex VI to this Complementary Law, with the
  specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications, when acquired by bodies and entities mentioned in items I and II of § 1 of this article.
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3 A joint act of the Ministry of Finance and the CGIBS, after consulting the Ministry of Health, shall disclose, every 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, the list of medicines
  entitled to the zero rate of the IBS and CBS, as provided in the caput of this article and in item III of § 1 of this article.        (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 4 In the event of a public health emergency recognized by the competent federal, state, Federal District or municipal Legislative Branch, a joint act of the
  Minister of Finance, the Ministry of Health and the CGIBS may be issued, at any time, solely to include medicines and lines of care
  not covered by the rate reduction referred to in this article, with the validity of the benefit limited to the period of the respective public health emergency.
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section V

                                                             Basic Menstrual Health Care Products

        Art. 147. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the following basic menstrual
  health care products are reduced to zero:

          I - tampons classified under NCM/SH code 9619.00.00;


        II - internal or external, disposable or reusable sanitary pads, and absorbent underwear classified under NCM/SH code 9619.00.00; and

        III - menstrual cups classified under NCM/SH code 9619.00.00.

        Sole paragraph. The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies only to basic menstrual health care products that meet
  the requirements set out in an Anvisa rule.

                                                                                   Section VI

                                                                  Vegetables, Fruit and Eggs

       Art. 148. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the supply of the vegetables, fruit and eggs listed in Annex
  XV to this Complementary Law are reduced to zero, with the specification of the respective NCM/SH classifications.

        Sole paragraph. The products mentioned in the caput of this article, in accordance with the NCM/SH classification rules, may be presented whole, cut
  into slices or pieces, grated, turned, peeled, defoliated, washed, sanitized, packaged, fresh, chilled or frozen, even if
  mixed.

                                                                                   Section VII

        Passenger Automobiles Acquired by Persons with Disabilities or with Autism Spectrum Disorder and by Professional Drivers who
                                          Dedicate the Automobile to Use in the Rental Category (Taxi)

        Art. 149. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the sale of nationally manufactured passenger automobiles with at least
  4 (four) doors, including the trunk access door, are reduced to zero when acquired by:

          I - professional drivers who demonstrably carry out, in an automobile they own, the activity of independent passenger driver, as
  holder of a public authorization, permit or concession, and who dedicate the automobile to use in the rental category (taxi);

        II - persons with:

        a) physical, visual or hearing disability;

        b) severe or profound intellectual disability; or

         c) autism spectrum disorder, with impairments in social communication and in restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior of moderate or severe
  level, under the terms of legislation on the subject.

        § 1 A person with a disability is considered to be one with a long-term impairment of a physical, mental, intellectual or sensory nature that, in interaction with
  one or more barriers, may obstruct their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others, in accordance with the criteria for
  recognition of disability status set out in art. 150 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2 The rate reductions referred to in the caput of this article apply only:

        I - in the case of item I of the caput of this article, to an electric passenger automobile or one equipped with an engine of no more than 2,000 cm³ (two thousand
  cubic centimeters) displacement powered by fuel of renewable origin, reversible combustion system or hybrid; and

        II - in the case of item II of the caput of this article, to an automobile whose sale price to the consumer, including taxes that would be levied if the
  reductions did not exist and not including the costs necessary for the adaptation referred to in § 3 of this article, is not more than R$ 200,000.00 (two hundred thousand reais),
  with the benefit limited to a transaction value of up to R$ 70,000.00 (seventy thousand reais).

         II - in the case of item II of the caput of this article, to an automobile whose sale price to the consumer, including taxes that would be levied if the
  reductions did not exist and not including the costs necessary for the adaptation referred to in § 3 of this article, is not more than R$ 200,000.00 (two hundred thousand reais),
  with the benefit limited to a transaction value of up to R$ 100,000.00 (one hundred thousand reais).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3 In the case of item "a" of item II of the caput of this article, when the person is physically able to drive, the benefit shall cover only automobiles
  that are adapted, adaptations being considered those necessary to enable driving and not offered to the general public. (Repealed by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

        § 3 (Repealed).       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 4 In the case of item II of the caput of this article, passenger automobiles shall be acquired directly by persons who have full legal
  capacity or through their legal representative or attorney-in-fact.

        § 5 The legal representative or attorney-in-fact referred to in § 4 of this article shall be jointly and severally liable for any tax that goes unpaid as a result of the
  rate reductions referred to in this Section.

        § 6 The limits set out in item II of § 2 of this article shall be updated annually, on January 1, solely for the purpose of increasing them, based on the
  variation in the average price of new automobiles falling within those limits on the Table of the Getúlio Vargas Economic Research Institute Foundation (Fipe Table), under the terms of a joint
  act of the Minister of State for Finance and the IBS Management Committee.

       Art. 150. For the purposes of recognizing the right to the rate reductions referred to in this Section, a person with a disability is considered to be one who
  falls into at least one of the following categories:

        I - physical disability: complete or partial alteration of one or more segments of the human body that impairs
  physical function, in the form of:

        a) paraplegia;

        b) paraparesis;

        c) monoplegia;

        d) monoparesis;

        e) tetraplegia;

        f) tetraparesis;

        g) triplegia;

        h) triparesis;

        i) hemiplegia;


        j) hemiparesis;

        k) ostomy;

        l) amputation or absence of a limb;

        m) cerebral palsy;

        n) dwarfism; or

        o) limbs with congenital or acquired deformity;

        II - hearing disability: bilateral, partial or total loss, of 41 dB (forty-one decibels) or more, measured by audiogram at frequencies of 500 Hz
  (five hundred hertz), 1,000 Hz (one thousand hertz), 2,000 Hz (two thousand hertz) and 3,000 Hz (three thousand hertz);

        III - visual disability:

        a) blindness, in which visual acuity is equal to or less than 0.05 (five hundredths) in the better eye, with the best optical correction;

        b) low vision, in which visual acuity is between 0.3 (three tenths) and 0.05 (five hundredths) in the better eye, with the best optical correction;

        c) cases in which the sum of the measurement of the visual field in both eyes is equal to or less than 60 (sixty) degrees;

        d) simultaneous occurrence of any of the conditions provided for in items "a", "b" and "c" of this item; or

        e) monocular vision, in which the person has vision equal to or less than 20% (twenty percent) in one eye, while maintaining normal vision in the other;

        IV - mental disability: intellectual functioning significantly below average, manifested before age 18 (eighteen) and limitations
  associated with two or more areas of adaptive skills, such as:

        a) communication;

        b) personal care;

        c) social skills;

        d) use of community resources;

        e) health and safety;

        f) academic skills;

        g) leisure; and

        h) work.

          § 1 The provisions of items I, II and III of the caput of this article apply to disabilities of moderate or severe degree, understood as those that cause
  partial or total impairment of the functions of the body segments involved in the safety of vehicle driving, resulting in impairment of physical
  function and total or partial inability to drive.

        § 2 Aesthetic deformities and those that do not cause difficulties in the performance of the person's locomotor functions are not included among physical
  disabilities.

        Art. 151. For purposes of granting the rate reductions referred to in this Section, proof of the disability and of the status of person with
  autism spectrum disorder shall be provided by means of an assessment report issued:

        I - by a public health service provider;

        II - by a contracted or accredited private health service provider that is part of the Unified Health System (SUS); or

        III - by the Department of Motor Vehicles (Detran) or its accredited clinics.

        § 1 The completion of the assessment report, under the terms of this article, shall comply with the provisions of a joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB (Federal Revenue Service).

       § 2 The accredited clinics referred to in item III of the caput of this article are jointly and severally liable for taxes that go unpaid,
  with the legal additions, if fraudulent issuance of an assessment report by their agents is proven.

        Art. 152. The rate reductions referred to in art. 149 of this Complementary Law may be enjoyed:

        I - in the case of item I of the caput of art. 149 of this Complementary Law, at intervals of not less than 2 (two) years;

        II - in the case of item II of the caput of art. 149 of this Complementary Law, at intervals of not less than 4 (four) years.

       II - in the case of item II of the caput of art. 149 of this Complementary Law, at intervals of not less than 3 (three) years.                (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. In cases of total loss or disappearance of the automobile due to theft or robbery, the rate reductions may be enjoyed at any
  time.

        Art. 153. The right to the rate reductions referred to in art. 149 of this Complementary Law shall be recognized by the state or Federal District tax administration
  of the applicant's domicile and by the RFB, upon prior verification that the acquirer meets the requirements set out in this Section.

        Art. 154. Taxes shall be levied normally on any optional accessories that are not original equipment of the automobile acquired.

         Art. 155. Disposal of the automobile acquired under this Section that occurs at intervals shorter than those defined in art. 152, counted from the date of its
  acquisition, to persons who have not had the right referred to in art. 153 of this Complementary Law recognized shall result in payment by the seller of the
  taxes waived, updated as provided in tax legislation.

        § 1 Early disposal referred to in this article shall also subject the seller to payment of fines and default interest provided for in legislation in force.

        § 2 The provisions of the caput of this article do not apply in cases of:

        I - transfer of the automobile acquired:

        a) to the insurer, in cases of total loss or disappearance due to theft or robbery;
        b) due to the death of the beneficiary;

        II - fiduciary assignment of the automobile as collateral.

                                                                                      Section VIII

                                  Services Provided by a Non-Profit Scientific, Technological and Innovation Institution (ICT)

         Art. 156. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the provision of research and development services by a non-profit
  Scientific, Technological and Innovation Institution (ICT) are reduced to zero for:

         Art. 156. The IBS and CBS rates levied on the provision of research and development services by a non-profit
  Scientific, Technological and Innovation Institution (ICT), as well as by support foundations accredited as provided by law, are reduced to zero for: (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the direct public administration, government agencies and public foundations; or

        II - a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime,

  are reduced to zero.

        Sole paragraph. The rate reduction provided for in the caput of this article applies to a non-profit ICT that, cumulatively:

        I - includes in its corporate or statutory purpose:

        a) basic or applied research of a scientific or technological nature; or

        b) the development of new products, services or processes;

        II - meets the conditions for enjoying the immunity provided for in item III of the caput of art. 9 of this Complementary Law for transactions carried out by non-profit
  education and social assistance institutions.

                                                                                    CHAPTER V

        URBAN, SEMI-URBAN AND METROPOLITAN ROAD AND RAIL PUBLIC COLLECTIVE PASSENGER TRANSPORT

        Art. 157. The supply of urban, semi-urban and metropolitan road and rail public collective
  passenger transport services, under a regime of public authorization, permit or concession, is exempt from the IBS and CBS.

        Sole paragraph. For the purposes of the caput of this article, the following are considered:

        I - public collective passenger transport service: one accessible to the entire population upon individualized payment, with routes and prices set
  by the public authorities;

        II - road transport: the land transport service carried out on urban and rural roads;

        III - rail transport: that carried out by means of railways, including urban trains, subways, light rail vehicles and monorails;

        IV - urban passenger transport: the service of an urban nature provided within the territory of the Municipality;

        V - semi-urban passenger transport: the intermunicipal, interstate or international travel service between nearby localities of an
  urban or metropolitan nature; and

        VI - metropolitan passenger transport: the service provided between municipalities belonging to the same metropolitan region.

                                                                                    CHAPTER VI

                  URBAN REHABILITATION OF HISTORIC ZONES AND CRITICAL AREAS FOR URBAN RECOVERY AND RECONVERSION

         Art. 158. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the IBS and CBS rates on transactions related to
  urban rehabilitation projects for historic zones and critical areas for urban recovery and reconversion of the Municipalities or the Federal District, to be
  delimited by municipal or district law, are reduced by 60% (sixty percent).

        Sole paragraph. In the case of leasing of properties provided for in item VI of the caput of art. 162 of this Complementary Law, the rate reduction referred to in the
  caput of this article shall be 80% (eighty percent).

        Art. 159. The urban rehabilitation of historic zones and critical areas for urban recovery and reconversion of the Municipalities has as its objective the preservation
  of heritage, the qualification of public spaces, the recovery of residential areas, the restoration of buildings and improvements to urban and mobility infrastructure.

         Sole paragraph. In using the resources of the fund referred to in art. 159-A of the Federal Constitution, the States and the Federal District shall take into consideration the
  objectives referred to in the caput of this article in relation to their historic zones and critical areas for urban recovery and reconversion, including through
  incentives for the establishment of businesses in the area and the development of economic activity.

          Art. 160. In order to obtain the benefit referred to in art. 158, the Municipalities must submit to the Tripartite Commission referred to in art. 161 of this
  Complementary Law economic and social development projects for the respective preservation, recovery, reconversion and urban rehabilitation areas and historic
  zones.

        Art. 161. The Tripartite Commission responsible for analyzing the projects referred to in art. 160 of this Complementary Law shall be composed of:

        I - 2 (two) representatives of the Ministry of Cities;

        II - 2 (two) representatives of the Ministry of Finance;

        III - 4 (four) representatives of the IBS Management Committee, of which 2 (two) shall represent the States or the Federal District and 2 (two) shall
  represent the Municipalities or the Federal District.

        Art. 162. The benefit referred to in art. 158 shall be restricted to projects approved under art. 163 of this Complementary Law and shall cover the following
  transactions:

         I - provision of services for the preparation of architectural, urban planning, landscape, environmental, ecological, engineering, infrastructure and
  risk mitigation projects and their corresponding executive projects;

         II - provision of construction management, coordination, general contracting or subcontracting services for all works and
  services related to buildings and urbanization, infrastructure and other similar works, including auxiliary or complementary services typical of civil construction;

        III - provision of repair, restoration, conservation and renovation services for properties;


        IV - provision of services relating to:

        a) engineering, surveying, digital mapping and scanning, digital modeling, scale models, soil surveys, foundations, geology, urban planning, maintenance,
  environmental performance, climate efficiency, cleaning, environment and sanitation; and

        b) complementary projects for electrical and hydraulic installations, fire prevention and fighting, and structural projects;

         V - first sale of properties located in rehabilitated zones made by the owner within a period of up to 5 (five) years, counted from the date of issuance of the
  occupancy permit;

        VI - leasing of properties located in rehabilitated zones, for a period of 5 (five) years, counted from the date of issuance of the occupancy permit.

        Sole paragraph. The services mentioned in items I to IV of the caput of this article shall be entitled to the benefit until the completion date provided for in the approved project.

        Art. 163. Federal ordinary law shall establish:

        I - the concepts of preservation, recovery, reconversion and urban rehabilitation;

        II - the institutional affiliation and powers of the Tripartite Commission;

        III - the criteria for approval of projects submitted to the Tripartite Commission; and

        IV - the governance to be adopted for receiving and evaluating projects.

                                                                                    CHAPTER VII

                                               RURAL PRODUCERS AND NON-TAXPAYER INTEGRATED RURAL PRODUCERS

        Art. 164. A rural producer, whether an individual or a legal entity, earning revenue of less than R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais) in the calendar year, and an
  integrated rural producer shall not be considered IBS and CBS taxpayers.

         § 1 An integrated rural producer is considered to be an agro-silvo-pastoral producer, whether an individual or a legal entity, who, individually or in association,
  with or without the labor cooperation of employees, is bound to an integrator by means of a vertical integration contract, receiving goods or services for the production and
  supply of raw materials, intermediate goods or final consumption goods.

       § 2 If, during the calendar year, the rural producer exceeds the annual revenue limit provided for in the caput of this article, it shall become a taxpayer as of the
  second month following the occurrence of the excess.

        § 3 The effects provided for in § 2 shall take place in the following calendar year if the excess verified in relation to annual revenue is not more than 20% (twenty
  percent) of the limit referred to in the caput of this article.

         § 4 In the case of a new activity, the limit referred to in the caput of this article shall be proportional to the number of months in which the producer has carried out
  activity, with fractions of months counted as a whole month.

        § 5 For the purposes of the caput, a legal entity is also considered to include an association or cooperative of rural producers:

        I - whose revenue is less than R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais) in the calendar year; and

        II - is made up exclusively of individual rural producers whose revenue is less than R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais) in the calendar
  year.

         § 6 If a rural producer, whether an individual or a legal entity, holds an equity interest in another legal entity that carries out agricultural activity, the limit
  provided for in the caput of this article shall be verified in relation to the sum of the revenue earned in the calendar year by all such persons.

        Art. 165. A rural producer or integrated rural producer may opt, at any time, to register as an IBS and CBS taxpayer under the regular regime.

        § 1 The effects of the option provided for in the caput of this article shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which the request was made.

        § 2 The option to register under the terms of the caput of this article shall be irrevocable for the entire calendar year and shall apply to subsequent calendar years,
  subject to the provisions of art. 166 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3 A rural producer that earned revenue equal to or greater than R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million six hundred thousand reais) in the calendar year prior to the
  entry into force of this Complementary Law shall be considered a taxpayer as of the beginning of the effects of this Complementary Law, regardless of
  any action taken.

         Art. 166. A rural producer or integrated rural producer may renounce the option referred to in art. 165 as provided in the regulation, subject to the provisions of §
  5 of art. 41 of this Complementary Law.

         Sole paragraph. In the case referred to in the caput of this article, the rural producer or integrated rural producer shall cease to be an IBS and CBS taxpayer as of the
  first day of the calendar year following the renunciation of the option, subject to the provisions of art. 164 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 167. The amount established in the caput of art. 164 of this Complementary Law shall be updated annually based on the variation of the IPCA.

         Art. 168. A taxpayer of IBS and CBS subject to the regular regime may appropriate presumed credits of such taxes relating to purchases of goods and
  services from a rural producer or integrated rural producer that is not a taxpayer, as referred to in art. 164 of this Complementary Law. Effects pending.

        § 1 The electronic tax document relating to the purchase shall itemize:

        I - the value of the transaction, corresponding to the amount paid to the supplier;

        II - the amount of the presumed credit; and

        III - the net amount for tax purposes, corresponding to the difference between the amounts itemized in items I and II of this paragraph.

       § 2 In the case of a good or service supplied by an integrated producer, the value of the transaction referred to in item I of § 1 of this article shall be the amount of the
  integrated producer's remuneration determined based on the integration contract.

        § 3 The amount of the presumed credit referred to in item II of § 1 of this article shall be the result of applying the percentages referred to in § 4 of this article
  to the value of the transaction referred to in item III of § 1 of this article.

        § 4 The percentages shall be defined and disclosed annually by September, by joint act of the Minister of State for Finance and the IBS Management
  Committee, and shall enter into force as of January 1 of the following year.

        § 5 The definition of the percentages referred to in § 4:


        I - shall be carried out, as provided in the regulation, based on available tax information;

        II - shall result from the proportion between:

        a) the amount of IBS and CBS charged in relation to the total value of goods and services acquired by non-taxpayer rural producers; and

        b) the total value of goods and services supplied by non-taxpayer rural producers referred to in item III of § 1 of this article; and

         III - shall be based on the average of the annual percentages relating to transactions carried out in the 5 (five) calendar years prior to that of the disclosure period
  provided for in § 4.

         § 6 The percentages referred to in § 4 of this article may be differentiated, in accordance with the categories established in the regulation, according to the good or
  service supplied by the rural producer or integrated rural producer.

        § 6 The percentages referred to in § 4 may be differentiated, in accordance with the categories established in the regulation, according to the good or service
  supplied by the rural producer or integrated rural producer, the level of annual revenue and the type of rural producer. (Wording given by Complementary Law
  No. 227 of 2026)

        § 7 For the purposes of § 5 of this article, purchases of goods and services referred to in item I of the caput of art. 57 of this Complementary
  Law shall not be considered, nor shall the purchase of goods and services intended for the personal use and consumption of the rural producer or of persons related to the producer, under the terms of item II
  of the caput of art. 57 of this Complementary Law.

       § 8 The IBS and CBS presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article may be used for deduction, respectively, from the amount of IBS and
  CBS owed by the taxpayer, with reimbursement permitted as provided in Section X of Chapter II of Title I of this Book.

         § 9 The right to appropriate and use the presumed credit referred to in this article also applies to a cooperative society in relation to the receipt
  of goods and services from its members that are not IBS and CBS taxpayers under art. 164 of this Complementary Law and are not opting for Simples Nacional,
  including in the case of opting for the specific regime referred to in art. 271 of this Complementary Law, except where the good is sent for
  processing at the cooperative and returned to the member.

        § 10. Exceptionally, from 2027 to 2031, the period referred to in item III of § 5 may be less than 5 (five) years, depending on the availability of
  information.

                                                                                   CHAPTER VIII

                                               INDEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL CARGO TRANSPORTER NOT A TAXPAYER

         Art. 169. A taxpayer of IBS and CBS subject to the regular regime may appropriate presumed credits of such taxes relating to the purchase of
  cargo transport services from an independent individual transporter who is not a taxpayer of such taxes or who is registered as a MEI (Individual Micro-Entrepreneur). Effects
  pending.

        § 1 The presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article:

        I - apply only to a taxpayer that acquires goods and services and bears the charge for the value of the cargo transport service;

        II - do not apply to a taxpayer that acquires goods and services and bears the charge for the value of the transport as part of the value of the transaction, even if
  specified separately in the documents relating to the purchase.

        § 2 The electronic tax document relating to the purchase shall itemize:

        I - the value of the transaction, corresponding to the amount paid to the supplier;

        II - the amount of the presumed credit; and

        III - the net amount for tax purposes, corresponding to the difference between the amounts itemized in items I and II of this paragraph.

        § 3 The amount of the presumed credit referred to in item II of § 2 of this article shall be the result of applying the percentages referred to in § 4 of this article
  to the value of the transaction referred to in item III of § 2 of this article.

        § 4 The percentages shall be defined and disclosed annually by September, by joint act of the Minister of State for Finance and the IBS Management
  Committee, and shall enter into force as of January 1 of the following year.

        § 5 The definition of the percentages referred to in § 4:

        I - shall be carried out, as provided in the regulation, based on available tax information;

        II - shall result from the proportion between:

        a) the amount of IBS and CBS charged in relation to the total value of purchases made by the transporters referred to in the caput of this article; and

        b) the total value referred to in item III of § 2 of this article in relation to the services supplied by the transporters referred to in the caput of this article; and

        III - shall be based on transactions carried out in the calendar year prior to that of the disclosure period provided for in § 4 of this article.

         § 6 For the purposes of § 5 of this article, purchases of goods and services for personal use and consumption referred to in item I of the caput of art. 57 shall
  not be considered, nor shall the purchase of goods and services intended for the personal use and consumption of the transporter or of persons related to the transporter, under the terms of
  item II of the caput of art. 57 of this Complementary Law.

        § 7 The IBS and CBS presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article may only be used for deduction, respectively, from the amount of IBS
  and CBS owed by the taxpayer.

        § 8 The right to appropriate and use the presumed credit referred to in this article also applies to a cooperative society in relation to the receipt
  of cargo transport services from its members that are independent individual transporters and are not IBS and CBS taxpayers, including in the case of
  opting for the specific regime referred to in art. 271 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                    CHAPTER IX

          WASTE AND OTHER MATERIALS INTENDED FOR RECYCLING, REUSE OR REVERSE LOGISTICS ACQUIRED FROM AN INDIVIDUAL,
                                        COOPERATIVE OR OTHER FORM OF GRASSROOTS ORGANIZATION

        Art. 170. A taxpayer of IBS and CBS subject to the regular regime may appropriate presumed credits of such taxes relating to purchases of
  solid waste from incentivized collectors for use in an environmentally appropriate final disposal process. Effects pending.

        § 1 For the purposes of the caput of this article, the following are considered:


        I - solid waste: material, substance, object or good discarded resulting from human activities in society, for which final disposal is carried out, proposed
  to be carried out or is required to be carried out, in solid or semi-solid states, as well as gases contained in containers and liquids whose particularities
  make it unviable for them to be discharged into the public sewage network or into bodies of water or that require technically or economically unviable solutions
  given the best available technology;

        II - incentivized collectors:

       a) an individual who carries out the collection or sorting of solid waste and sale to an IBS and CBS taxpayer that gives it environmentally
  appropriate final disposal;

        b) an association or cooperative of individuals that exclusively carries out the activity mentioned in item "a" of this item; and

        c) an association or cooperative that exclusively brings together the persons referred to in item "b" of this item;

        III - environmentally appropriate final disposal: disposal of solid waste for reuse, recycling, composting and recovery, as well as, as
  provided in the regulation, other forms of disposal permitted by the competent agencies, including final disposal.

        § 2 The presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article may only be used for deduction, respectively, from the amount of IBS and CBS
  owed by the taxpayer, and shall be calculated by applying the following percentages to the value of the purchase recorded in a document accepted by the
  tax administration as provided in the regulation:

        I - for the IBS presumed credit:

        a) in 2029, 1.3% (one point three percent);

        b) in 2030, 2.6% (two point six percent);

        c) in 2031, 3.9% (three point nine percent);

        d) in 2032, 5.2% (five point two percent);

        e) as of 2033, 13% (thirteen percent); and

        II - for the CBS presumed credit, 7% (seven percent).

        § 3 The IBS and CBS presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article shall not be granted for purchases of:

        I - agricultural pesticides, their residues and packaging;

        II - industrialized and compounded medicines for human home use and, subject to criteria established in the regulation, their packaging;

        III - batteries and cells;

        IV - tires;

        V - electronic products for domestic use and their components;

        VI - lubricating oils, their residues and packaging;

        VII - fluorescent, sodium vapor, mercury vapor and mixed light lamps; and

        VIII - copper scrap.

        § 4 The provisions of item VI of § 3 of this article do not apply to purchases of used or contaminated lubricating oil by a re-refiner or collector authorized
  by the National Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels Agency (ANP) to carry out collection, and the granting of IBS and CBS presumed credits
  as provided in this Chapter is permitted.

                                                                                  CHAPTER X

                                   USED MOVABLE GOODS ACQUIRED FROM A NON-TAXPAYER INDIVIDUAL FOR RESALE
        Art. 171. The taxpayer of IBS and CBS subject to the regular regime may appropriate presumed credits of the said taxes relative to acquisitions, for
  resale, of used movable property from a natural person who is not a taxpayer of the said taxes or who is registered as MEI. Effects to take place

         § 1º The presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article shall be calculated by applying the following percentages to the value of the acquisition
  recorded in a document accepted by the tax administration in the form of the regulation:

          I - for the IBS presumed credit, the percentage equivalent to the sum of the IBS rates applicable to operations with movable property referred to in the caput of this
  article, fixed by the Municipality and by the State where the establishment in which the acquisition was carried out is located, in effect:

        a) on the date of resale, for acquisitions made until December 31, 2032;

        b) on the date of acquisition, for acquisitions made as of January 1, 2033;

        II - for the CBS presumed credit, the CBS rate applicable to operations with the movable property referred to in the caput of this article, fixed by the Union and
  in effect:

        a) on the date of resale, for acquisitions made until December 31, 2026;

        b) on the date of acquisition, for acquisitions made as of January 1, 2027.

         § 2º The presumed credits referred to in the caput of this article may only be used to deduct, respectively, the IBS and the CBS owed by the
  taxpayer, upon resale of the used property on which the respective credits were calculated.

        § 3º The regulation shall govern the manner of appropriation of the presumed credits in the event that it is not possible to link such credits to the used
  property resold.

        § 4º For purposes of this article, used movable property is considered to be that which has been the object of supply for final consumption by a natural person and
  has returned to commercialization.

                                                                                    TITLE V

                                                                SPECIFIC REGIMES OF IBS AND CBS

                                                                                  CHAPTER I
                                                                              FUELS

                                                                                     Section I

                                                                              General Provisions

          Art. 172. IBS and CBS shall be levied only once on operations, even if initiated abroad, with the following fuels, regardless of their
  purpose:

        I - gasoline;

        I - gasoline and its streams;        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - anhydrous fuel ethanol (EAC);

        III - diesel oil;

        III - diesel oil and its streams;     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        IV - biodiesel (B100);

        V - liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), including liquefied gas derived from natural gas (GLGN);

        VI - hydrated fuel ethanol (EHC);

        VII - aviation kerosene;

        VIII - fuel oil;

        IX - processed natural gas;

        X - biomethane;

        XI - vehicular natural gas (GNV); and

       XII - other fuels specified and authorized by the National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels (ANP), listed in a joint act
  of the IBS Management Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union.

         § 1º For purposes of items I and III of the caput of this article, "streams" are considered to be liquid hydrocarbons derived from petroleum and liquid
  hydrocarbons derived from natural gas used in mechanical blending for the production of gasoline or diesel, in accordance with the rules established by the
  ANP.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º A joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS shall provide for cases of suspension of the IBS and the CBS levied on operations with liquid hydrocarbons derived
  from non-fuel petroleum or from natural gas, including naphtha, provided that: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the acquirers are petrochemical central plants duly authorized by the ANP;         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - they are used as an input by the petrochemical industry; and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        III - they comply with the criteria and conditions established in the said joint act.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 3º A joint act of the CGIBS and the Executive Branch of the Union may postpone the implementation of the specific regime for the fuels referred to in
  items IX, X and XI of the caput of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                     Section II

                                                                              Of the Tax Base

        Art. 173. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS shall be the quantity of fuel that is the object of the operation.

        § 1º The quantity of fuel shall be measured according to the unit of measurement proper to each fuel.

       § 2º The value of the IBS and the CBS, under the terms of this Chapter, shall correspond to the multiplication of the tax base by the specific rate applicable to each
  fuel.

                                                                                    Section III

                                                                                 Of the Rates

        Art. 174. The rates of the IBS and the CBS for the fuels referred to in art. 172 of this Complementary Law shall be:

        I - uniform throughout the national territory, specific per unit of measurement and differentiated by product;

         II - adjusted in the year prior to the year they take effect, observing, for their increase, the ninety-day advance notice period provided for in item "c" of item III of the caput
  of art. 150 of the Federal Constitution;

        III - disclosed:

        a) as to the IBS, by the IBS Management Committee;

        b) as to the CBS, by the head of the Executive Branch of the Union.

        § 1º The CBS rates in 2027 shall be fixed so as not to exceed the tax burden levied on fuels of the federal taxes extinguished or
  reduced by Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, calculated under the terms of § 2º of this article.

        § 2º In determining the tax burden referred to in § 1º of this article, the following shall be considered:

         I - the direct tax burden of the contributions provided for in item "b" of item I and in item IV of the caput of art. 195 of the Federal Constitution and of the Contribution
  to the PIS/Pasep referred to in art. 239 of the Federal Constitution, levied on the production, importation and commercialization of fuels, calculated as
  follows:

        a) the tax burden per unit of measurement of the contributions referred to in this item shall be determined for each of the months from July 2025 to June 2026;

        b) the values determined under item "a" of this item shall be adjusted to July 2026 prices, based on the variation of the IPCA, summed and divided
  by 12 (twelve);
         c) the value determined under item "b" of this item shall be updated to 2027 prices by adding a percentage equivalent to the target for
  inflation for 2027, set by the National Monetary Council, in effect in July 2026; and

         II - the indirect tax burden arising from the contributions referred to in item I of this paragraph, from the tax referred to in item IV of the caput of art. 153 of the
  Federal Constitution and from the tax referred to in item V of the caput of the same article on insurance operations, levied on inputs, services and capital
  goods used in the production, importation and commercialization of fuels and not recovered as credit, calculated as follows:

         a) the values shall be determined at 2025 prices and divided by the volume of the respective fuel consumed in the country in 2025, so as to result in the tax
  burden per unit of measurement;

        b) the values determined under item "a" of this item shall be adjusted to July 2026 prices, based on the variation of the IPCA;

         c) the value determined under item "b" of this item shall be updated to 2027 prices by adding a percentage equivalent to the target for
  inflation for 2027, set by the National Monetary Council, in effect in July 2026.

         § 3º For years subsequent to 2027, the CBS rates shall be fixed so as not to exceed the tax burden calculated under § 2º of this article,
  adjusted by a percentage equivalent to the variation of the weighted average sale price to the final consumer, obtained through research carried out by a
  competent agency or based on data from electronic sales invoices to the final consumer, between:

        I - the 12 (twelve) months prior to July of the year preceding the year for which the rate will be fixed; and

        II - the period from July 2025 to June 2026.

        § 4º The IBS rates shall be fixed:

        I - in 2029, so as not to exceed 10% (ten percent) of the tax burden levied on fuels of the state and municipal taxes extinguished or
  reduced by Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, calculated under the terms of § 5º of this article;

        II - in 2030, so as not to exceed 20% (twenty percent) of the tax burden calculated under § 5º, adjusted under § 6º of this article;

        III - in 2031, so as not to exceed 30% (thirty percent) of the tax burden calculated under § 5º, adjusted under § 6º of this article;

        IV - in 2032, so as not to exceed 40% (forty percent) of the tax burden calculated under § 5º, adjusted under § 6º of this article;

        V - as of 2033, so as not to exceed the tax burden calculated under § 5º, adjusted under § 6º of this article.

        § 5º In determining the tax burden referred to in items I to V of § 4º of this article, the following shall be considered:

        I - the direct tax burden of the tax referred to in item II of the caput of art. 155 of the Federal Constitution levied on the production, importation and commercialization
  of fuels, calculated as follows:

        a) the tax burden per unit of measurement of the tax referred to in this item shall be determined for each of the months from July 2027 to June 2028;

        b) the values determined under item "a" of this item shall be adjusted to July 2028 prices, based on the variation of the IPCA, summed and divided
  by 12 (twelve);

         c) the value determined under item "b" of this item shall be updated to 2029 prices by adding a percentage equivalent to the target for
  inflation for 2029, set by the National Monetary Council, in effect in July 2028; and

         II - the indirect tax burden arising from the taxes referred to in item II of the caput of art. 155 and item III of the caput of art. 156 of the Federal Constitution,
  levied on inputs, services and capital goods used in the production, importation and commercialization of fuels and not recovered as credit,
  calculated as follows:

         a) the values shall be determined at 2027 prices and divided by the volume of the respective fuel consumed in the country in 2027, so as to result in the tax
  burden per unit of measurement;

        b) the values determined under item "a" of this item shall be adjusted to July 2028 prices, based on the variation of the IPCA;

         c) the value determined under item "b" of this item shall be updated to 2029 prices by adding a percentage equivalent to the target for
  inflation for 2029, set by the National Monetary Council, in effect in July 2028.

         § 6º For years subsequent to 2029, the IBS rate shall be fixed so as not to exceed the tax burden calculated under § 5º of this article,
  adjusted by a percentage equivalent to the variation of the weighted average sale price to the final consumer, obtained through research carried out by a
  competent agency or based on data from electronic sales invoices to the final consumer, between:

        I - the 12 (twelve) months prior to July of the year preceding the year for which the rate will be fixed; and

        II - the period from July 2027 to June 2028.

        § 7º The methodology for calculating the tax burden for fixing the rates under §§ 1º and 4º of this article shall be approved by joint act of the Minister
  of State for Finance and the IBS Management Committee.

        § 8º The calculations for fixing the rates, based on the methodology referred to in § 7º of this article, shall be carried out, for the CBS, by the RFB and, for the IBS,
  by the IBS Management Committee.

         § 9º The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities shall provide the IBS Management Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union the
  subsidies necessary for the calculation of the IBS and CBS rates on fuels, by sharing data and information.

        § 10. The IBS rate calculated under §§ 4º to 6º of this article shall be distributed between the state IBS rate and the municipal IBS rate
  proportionally to their respective reference rates.

        § 11. In relation to the fuels referred to in item XII of the caput of art. 172 of this Complementary Law, the same rate shall be applied as observed for the
  fuel with the closest purpose, among those provided for in items I to XI of the caput of the said article, weighted by the respective energy
  equivalence, observing, in the case of biofuels, the provisions of art. 175.

        § 12. In the case of the fuels listed in the items of the caput of art. 172 that have their rates reduced during the period from March to June
  2026, the rates in effect in February 2026 shall be considered, for purposes of determining the direct tax burden under item I of § 2º of this article, for the months in which
  there is a reduction. (Included by Complementary Law No. 235, of 2026)

        Art. 175. Biofuels and low carbon emission hydrogen are hereby assured taxation lower than that levied on fossil fuels, so
  as to guarantee the competitive differential established in item VIII of § 1º of art. 225 of the Federal Constitution.

         § 1º The IBS and CBS rates relative to biofuels and low carbon emission hydrogen may not be lower than 40% (forty
  percent) and may not exceed 90% (ninety percent) of the rates levied on the respective compared fossil fuels.


        § 2º The reduced taxation referred to in this article shall be established taking into account, under the terms of the regulation:

        I - the energy equivalence, market prices and units of measurement of the compared fuels;

        II - the potential for reduction of environmental impacts of biofuels or of low carbon emission hydrogen in relation to the fossil fuels
  which they replace or with which they are blended.

         § 3º In relation to hydrated fuel ethanol (EHC), the differential referred to in the caput of this article shall be, at a minimum, that existing between the direct and indirect
  tax burden defined in §§ 2º and 5º of art. 174 of this Complementary Law on the said fuel and on gasoline C in the period from July 1, 2023 to
  June 30, 2024, for the following taxes:

        I - Contribution to the PIS/Pasep and Contribution for the Financing of Social Security (Cofins), for the CBS; and

      II - Tax on Operations relative to the Circulation of Goods and on the Provision of Interstate and Intermunicipal Transportation and
  Communication Services (ICMS), for the IBS.

         § 4º The calculation of the tax burden referred to in § 3º of this article shall be carried out based on the rates in effect on July 1, 2024, weighted by the sales volume
  of the respective products in each unit of the Federation and taking into account the Weighted Average Price to the Final Consumer (PMPF) observed in the period
  between July 1, 2023 and June 30, 2024.

        § 5º The differential referred to in § 3º of this article shall be:

       I - in 2027, for the CBS, and in 2029, for the IBS, the difference in burden referred to in § 3º of this article in percentage and absolute terms per unit of
  measurement;

        II - in subsequent calendar years, updated in accordance with the system established for the IBS and CBS rates in art. 174 of this Complementary Law.

        § 6º An act of the Federal Executive Branch may reduce the specific rates per unit of measurement of the CBS for biodiesel (B100) produced with raw
  material acquired from family farming.

                                                                                    Section IV

                                                                              Of Tax Liability

        Art. 176. Taxpayers of the specific IBS and CBS regime referred to in this Chapter are:

        I - the domestic producer of biofuels;

        II - the petroleum refinery and its bases;

        III - the petrochemical raw material central (CPQ);

       IV - the natural gas processing unit (UPGN) and the producing and industrial establishment treated as equivalent to it, defined and authorized by a competent
  agency;

        V - the fuel formulator;

        VI - the importer; and

        VII - any producing agent not referred to in items I to VI of this caput, authorized by a competent agency.

        § 1º The provisions of this article also apply to the fuel distributor in its operations as importer.

        § 2º A cooperative of ethanol producers authorized by a competent agency is treated as equivalent to a domestic producer of biofuels.

        Art. 177. In operations carried out directly with the taxpayers referred to in art. 176 of this Complementary Law, the acquirer shall be jointly and severally
  liable for payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on the operation, under the terms provided for in this article.

        § 1º The liability referred to in the caput:

         I - does not apply in the event that the payment transaction has been settled by an electronic instrument that allows the collection of the IBS and the CBS at the
  financial settlement of the operation (split payment), under the terms of arts. 31 to 35 of this Complementary Law;

        II - is limited to the amount of the IBS and the CBS not extinguished by the taxpayer, in the manner of items I and II of the caput of art. 27 of this Complementary Law;

         III - extends to the other participants in the economic chain, not referred to in the caput, who carry out operations subsequent to the single-phase taxation
  referred to in this Chapter, if there is proof that they contributed to the non-payment of the IBS and the CBS owed by the taxpayer.

        § 2º For purposes of defining the amount referred to in item II of § 1º, the chronological order provided for in item I of the
  single paragraph of art. 27 of this Complementary Law shall be observed in each assessment period.

                                                                                    Section V

                                                             Of Operations with Anhydrous Fuel Ethanol (EAC)

        Art. 178. Responsibility for the withholding and collection of the IBS and the CBS levied on imports of EAC or on outflows from the EAC producing establishment
  is hereby attributed to the petroleum refinery or its bases, the CPQ, the fuel formulator and the importer, in relation to the percentage of
  biofuel used in the blend, in operations with gasoline A.

        Art. 179. In operations with EAC:

        I - the acquirer of EAC intended for blending with gasoline A who carries out the outflow of the biofuel for a different destination is required to collect the IBS and the
  CBS levied on the biofuel;

        II - the fuel distributor that carries out blending of EAC with gasoline A in a percentage:

        a) higher than mandatory, shall be required to collect the IBS and the CBS referred to in art. 172 of this Complementary Law in relation to the volume of biofuel
  corresponding to the amount exceeding the mandatory blending percentage; and

        b) lower than mandatory, shall be entitled to reimbursement of the IBS and the CBS referred to in art. 172 of this Complementary Law in relation to the volume of
  biofuel corresponding to the amount blended less than the mandatory blending percentage.

                                                                                    Section VI

                                       Of Credits on the Acquisition of Fuels Subject to the Single-Phase Taxation Regime
         Art. 180. Appropriation of credits in relation to acquisitions of fuels subject to the single levy of the IBS and the CBS is prohibited, when
  intended for distribution, commercialization or resale.

         § 1º Except for the cases provided for in the caput of this article, the taxpayer under the regular regime may appropriate IBS and CBS credits in relation to the
  acquisition of fuels, under the terms of § 4º of art. 47 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The right to appropriate and use IBS and CBS credits relative to the acquisitions referred to in this Section, in the manner of § 1º of this article,
  is hereby assured to the fuel exporter.

                                                                                  CHAPTER II

                                                                        OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

                                                                                     Section I

                                                                              General Provisions

        Art. 181. Financial services are subject to a specific regime of levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

        Art. 182. For purposes of this Complementary Law, the following are considered financial services:

         I - credit operations, including fund-raising and on-lending operations, advances, loans, financing, discounting of instruments, recovery of
  credits and provision of guarantees, with the exception of securitization, factoring and early settlement of receivables of payment arrangements, referred to,
  respectively, in items IV, V and IX of the caput of this article;

        II - foreign exchange operations;

        III - operations with securities, including acquisition, trading, settlement, custody, brokerage, distribution and other forms of
  intermediation, as well as the activity of investment advisor and securities consultant;

        IV - securitization operations;

        V - factoring operations;

         VI - leasing, operating or financial, of any goods, including the assignment of rights and obligations, substitution of guarantee,
  amendment, cancellation and registration of contract and other services related to leasing;

        VII - consortium administration;

        VIII - management and administration of resources, including investment funds;

        IX - payment arrangements, including operations of the arrangement instituting entities and the payment institutions and the early settlement of receivables of these arrangements;

         IX - payment arrangements, including operations of the arrangement instituting entities and the payment institutions, the early settlement of receivables of these
  arrangements and the administration of loyalty programs; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        X - activities of entities administering organized markets, market infrastructures and central depositories;

        XI - insurance operations, with the exception of health insurance referred to in Chapter III of this Title;

        XII - reinsurance operations;

        XIII - private pension, composed of administration and management operations of open and closed supplementary pension plans;

        XIV - capitalization operations;

        XV - intermediation of consortiums, insurance, reinsurance, supplementary pension and capitalization; and

        XVI - virtual asset services.

        XVII - mutual asset protection operations.      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Single paragraph. This specific regime applies to the entirety of the consideration for the financial services provided for in items I to XVI of the caput
  of this article, regardless of their nomenclature.

        Art. 183. Financial services are subject to the specific regime of this Chapter when provided by natural and legal persons supervised
  by the government agencies that make up the National Financial System and by the other suppliers referred to in this article, subject to the provisions of art. 184.

        § 1º The natural and legal persons supervised referred to in the caput of this article, at the date of publication of this Complementary Law, are the following:

        I - banks of any kind;

        II - savings banks (caixas econômicas);

        III - credit cooperatives;

        IV - foreign exchange brokers;

        V - securities brokers;

        VI - securities distributors;

        VII - administrators and managers of securities portfolios, including investment funds;

        VIII - investment advisors;

        IX - securities consultants;

        X - correspondents registered with the Central Bank of Brazil;

        XI - consortium administrators;

        XII - brokers and other consortium intermediaries;

        XIII - direct credit companies;
        XIV - person-to-person lending companies;

        XV - development agencies;

        XVI - savings and loan associations;

        XVII - mortgage companies;

        XVIII - credit, financing and investment companies;

        XIX - real estate credit companies;

        XX - leasing companies;

        XXI - credit companies for microentrepreneurs and small businesses;

        XXII - payment institutions;

         XXIII - entities administering organized securities markets, including stock exchange and organized over-the-counter markets, clearing and
  settlement entities, central depositories and other financial market infrastructure entities;

        XXIV - insurance companies;

        XXV - reinsurers, including local reinsurers, admitted reinsurers and occasional reinsurers;

        XXVI - open supplementary pension entities and closed entities that do not meet the requirements mentioned in art. 26, § 9o, of this Complementary Law;

        XXVII - capitalization companies;

        XXVIII - insurance brokers, reinsurance brokers and other intermediaries of insurance, reinsurance, supplementary pension and capitalization; and

        XXIX - virtual asset service providers.

        § 2º Also included among the suppliers referred to in the caput of this article, even if not supervised by the government agencies that make up the
  National Financial System, are:

        I - participants in payment arrangements that are not payment institutions;

        I - participants in payment arrangements and entities that administer loyalty programs that are not payment institutions;
     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - companies whose purpose is the securitization of credits;

        III - factoring companies;

        IV - simple credit companies;

        V - correspondents registered with the Central Bank of Brazil; and

        VI - other suppliers that provide financial services:

        a) in the development of an economic activity;

        b) in a habitual manner or in a volume that characterizes an economic activity; or

        c) in a professional manner, even if the profession is not regulated.

        § 3º The provisions of this Chapter apply to suppliers that:

        I - come to be supervised by the government agencies referred to in the caput of this article after the date of publication of this Complementary Law; or

        II - come to carry out the operations referred to in items I to XVI of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, under the terms of item VI of § 2º of this article,
  even if not supervised by the government agencies referred to in the caput of this article.

        § 4º (VETOED).

         Art. 184. Services that, by regulatory provision, may only be provided by banking financial institutions and are remunerated by fees and
  commissions, including services of opening, maintaining and closing of demand deposit accounts and savings accounts, provision of checks, of withdrawal and of
  transfer of funds, are subject to the general rules of levy of the IBS and the CBS provided for in Title I of this Book.

         § 1º For purposes of the caput of this article, banking financial institutions are considered to be banks of any kind and savings banks, referred
  to in items I and II of § 1º of art. 183 of this Complementary Law.

          § 2º Services for maintaining and closing prepaid and postpaid payment accounts provided by payment institutions and remunerated by a
  fee and commission are also subject to the general rules of levy of the IBS and the CBS provided for in Title I of this Book.

         § 3o Also subject to the general rules of levy of the IBS and the CBS provided for in Title I of this Book and, if applicable, to the differentiated regimes referred to
  in Title IV of this Book, and not subject to the specific regime of this Chapter, are the other services provided by the suppliers referred to
  in art. 183 that are not defined as financial services in art. 182 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                   Section II

                                                               Common Provisions for Financial Services

         Art. 185. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS under the specific regime for financial services shall consist of the revenues of the operations, with the deductions
  provided for in this Chapter.

        Art. 186. Revenues from reversal of provisions and from recovery of credits written off as a loss shall make up the tax base of the IBS and the CBS, provided that
  the respective provision or write-off was deducted from the tax base.

         Art. 187. The deductions from the tax base provided for in this Chapter are limited to operations authorized by a government agency, provided that they are carried out within the
  operational limits provided for in the relevant legislation, with the deduction of any administrative expense being prohibited.



         Art. 188. Cooperative societies that provide financial services and exercise the option referred to in art. 271 of this Complementary Law shall
  reverse the effect of the tax base deductions provided for in this Chapter proportionally to the value that the operations benefited by a reduction to zero of the
  IBS and CBS rates represent of the total operations of the cooperative.

        Art. 189. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the IBS and CBS rates levied on financial services shall be:

        I - from 2027 to 2033, those fixed in accordance with the rules provided for in art. 233 of this Complementary Law; and

        II - as of 2034, those fixed for 2033.

        § 1º The rates referred to in the caput of this article shall be nationally uniform.

         § 2º The CBS rate and the state, district and municipal IBS rates shall be fixed so as to maintain the proportion between their respective
  reference rates.

        Art. 190. IBS and CBS credits on the acquisition of financial services, in the cases provided for in this Chapter, shall be appropriated based on the
  information provided by the suppliers to the IBS Management Committee and to the RFB, in the manner of the regulation, and shall be subject to the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this
  Complementary Law.

        Art. 191. Entities that carry out the operations with financial services referred to in this Chapter must provide, as an ancillary obligation, in the manner
  of the regulation, information on the operations carried out, without prejudice to a minimum set of information provided for in this Complementary Law.

                                                                                      Section III

                               Of Credit, Foreign Exchange, Securities, Securitization and Factoring Operations

         Art. 192. In credit, foreign exchange, and securities operations, referred to in items I to III of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law,
  for purposes of determining the tax base, the revenues of these operations shall be considered, with the deduction of:

        I - financial expenses with fund-raising;

        II - foreign exchange expenses relative to the operations referred to in item II of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law;

        III - losses in operations with securities referred to in item III of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law;

       IV - financial charges recognized as expenses, even if recorded in shareholders' equity, relative to debt instruments issued by the
  legal entity;

        V - losses incurred in the receipt of credits arising from the activities of financial institutions and other institutions authorized to operate by the
  Central Bank of Brazil in operations with financial services referred to in items I to V of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, and losses on the assignment
  of these credits and on the granting of discounts, provided that they are carried out at market value, also observing, in all cases, the same rules of
  deductibility of the income tax legislation applicable to such losses for assessment periods beginning as of January 1, 2027; and

        V - losses incurred in the receipt of credits arising from the activities of financial institutions and other institutions authorized to operate
  by the Central Bank of Brazil in operations with financial services referred to in items I to III of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, and losses on the
  assignment of these credits and on the granting of discounts, provided that they are carried out at market value, also observing, in all cases, the same rules
  of deductibility of the income tax legislation applicable to such losses for assessment periods beginning as of January 1, 2027; and
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        VI - expenses with investment advisors, securities consultants and correspondents registered with the Central Bank of Brazil, relative to the
  operations referred to in items I to III of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, provided that these services were not rendered by employees or
  officers of the company.

        § 1o The concept of revenues of the operations:

        I - does not include the value of the principal, in the case of credit operations;

        II - corresponds to the difference between the disposal value of the asset and its acquisition cost, in the case of disposal of securities.

        § 2o Financial expenses with fund-raising do not include payment of the principal.

         § 3º In the event of a reversal for any reason, offsetting the shareholders' equity account referred to in item IV of the caput of this article, the values
  previously deducted must be added to the tax base.

        § 4º The provisions of item IV of the caput of this article do not apply to equity instruments, such as shares, share deposit certificates and subscription
  warrants.

       § 5º The revenues and expenses computed in the tax base referred to in the caput of this article include monetary variations due to the exchange rate,
  when the result of the operations varies according to the quotation of foreign currency.

         § 6º Revenues and expenses recognized in offsetting fair value measurement, to the extent that they exceed the yield produced in the operations referred to in
  item III of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, must be disclosed in a subaccount and computed in the tax base at the time of the
  realization of the respective asset or liability.

        § 7º Revenues and expenses with derivative financial instruments contracted by the entities that carry out the operations provided for in this article shall also
  be computed in the tax base.

        § 8º Revenues from the services referred to in the caput of this article do not include, with the deduction of the respective fund-raising financial expenses being prohibited for purposes of
  determining the tax base, those earned in credit operations carried out between the cooperative and the member:

        I - with the cooperative's own resources or those of the members; or

        II - with public resources, earmarked, equalized or from official or constitutional funds.

         Art. 193. Securitization and factoring operations referred to in items IV and V of the caput of art. 182 are subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS at the rate provided for
  in this Section.

        § 1º The tax base of the IBS and the CBS shall correspond to the discount applied at early settlement, with the deduction of:

        I - financial expenses with fund-raising;

        II - securitization expenses, consisting of issuance, distribution, custody, bookkeeping, registration, preparation and formalization of documents, administration
  of the segregated assets and activity of fiduciary agents, collection agents and risk classification agents, provided that these services were not rendered by
  employees or officers of the company.

        § 2º The losses incurred in the receipt of credits and the losses on the assignment of these credits and on the granting of discounts may be deducted from the tax base referred to in § 1º,
  provided that they are carried out at market value.

        § 3º The losses referred to in § 2º that cannot be fully deducted from the tax base of a given assessment period, because they exceed the
  taxable values in such period, may be deducted in subsequent periods.

       § 4º The National Monetary Council and the Central Bank of Brazil, within their respective competencies, shall regulate the rules for qualification and
  disqualification with respect to the requirements provided for in this article.

        § 5o The provisions of this article apply to the Receivables Investment Fund (FIDC) that early settles commercial receivables through
  discounting of trade notes, promissory notes, checks and other commercial instruments, as defined in regulation to be issued by the National Monetary
  Council, if not classified as an investment entity, in accordance with the provisions of art. 23 of Law No. 14,754, of December 12, 2023, and its
  regulation.

        § 6o Quotaholders of the funds referred to in § 5º of this article are not subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS.

         Art. 194. Taxpayers under the regular regime who are not subject to the specific regime of this Section and are takers of credit operations referred to
  in item I of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law may appropriate IBS and CBS credits at the same rate owed on such credit
  operations, applied to the financial expenses relative to such operations actually paid, on a cash basis, and calculated from the following deductions
  from the amount of each installment, after the date of its payment:

        I - the amount corresponding to the value of the principal contained in each installment, in accordance with the amortization rules provided for in the contract; and

       II - the amount corresponding to the application of the Selic rate on the principal, calculated based on the average interest rate practiced in
  repo operations with federal government securities with a maturity of 1 (one) business day.

        Art. 195. Taxpayers under the regular regime who are not subject to the specific regime of this Section and issue debt instruments, including debentures and
  commercial notes, may appropriate credits in the manner of art. 194, during the period in which the instrument or security is held by a taxpayer under the specific regime
  of this Section.

         § 1º In the case referred to in the caput of this article, when the debt instrument is the object of a public offering, in the manner regulated by the Securities and
  Exchange Commission:

        I - the creditor under the specific regime referred to in this Section shall exclude from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS the amount corresponding to the portion of the interest and
  yield produced by the debt instrument that exceeds the SELIC rate; and

        II - the debtor shall not appropriate credits.

        § 2º The system referred to in § 1º of this article shall also apply to the creditor under the specific regime referred to in this Section that holds the debt instruments
  through an exclusive investment fund, whose portfolio is composed of at least 95% (ninety-five percent) of such instruments.

         Art. 196. The taker of the services of assignment of receivables, advance, discount, securitization and factoring referred to in items I, IV and V of
  the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law who is a taxpayer under the regular regime and is not subject to the specific regime of this Section may appropriate credits
  in these operations, in relation to the portion of the discount applied, at the time of early settlement of the receivable, on a cash basis, that exceeds the DI future
  interest rate curve, for the term of the advance.

        Art. 197. Members that are takers of credit operations with cooperative societies that provide financial services and exercise the option referred to in art. 271
  of this Complementary Law may not appropriate credits in the manner provided for in arts. 194 to 196.

        Art. 197. The following may not appropriate credits in the manner provided for in arts. 194 to 196 of this Complementary Law:           (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

          I - members that are takers of credit operations with cooperative societies that provide financial services and exercise the option referred to
  in art. 271 of this Complementary Law; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - takers of credit operations referenced in foreign currency and issuers of debt instruments referenced in foreign currency,
  subject to the provisions of art. 198 of this Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 198. Taxpayers under the regular regime who are not subject to the specific regime of this Section may appropriate IBS and CBS credits, based on
  the amounts paid by the supplier, on the fees and commissions relative to the operations referred to in items I to V of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law.

        Single paragraph. The provisions of the caput of this article also apply to acquisitions made by entities subject to the specific regime of this Section, provided
  that the respective expense is not deducted from the tax base.

        Art. 199. Appropriation of IBS and CBS credits on the acquisition of financial services referred to in items I to V of the caput of art. 182 of this
  Complementary Law that are not expressly permitted in arts. 194 to 198 is hereby prohibited.

         Art. 200. In the disposal of movable or immovable property that has been the object of a guarantee constituted in favor of a creditor subject to the specific regime of this Section,
  whose ownership has been consolidated by or transferred to it in payment of the debt, the following shall be observed:

        I - the consolidation of ownership of the property by the creditor shall not be subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS; and

        II - in the disposal of the property by the creditor:

        a) there shall be no levy of the IBS and the CBS, if the guarantee provider is not a taxpayer of these taxes; or

        b) there shall be levy of the IBS and the CBS under the same assessment rules that would be applicable if the disposal had been carried out directly by the
  guarantee provider, if the latter is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 1º The same rules relative to the IBS and the CBS that would be applicable if the disposal had been carried out by the guarantee provider shall apply to the acquirer.

         § 2º For purposes of any refund by the creditor to the guarantee provider of the amount of the disposal in excess of the debt, the disposal value of the
  property net of the IBS and the CBS shall be considered.

                                                                                     Section IV

                                                                          Of Leasing

        Art. 201. For purposes of determining the tax base, in leasing referred to in item VI of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law:

        I - service revenues shall be subject, to the extent of receipt, on a cash basis:

        a) in relation to installments of the consideration for operating leasing, at the following rates:


        1. in the case of immovable property, at the rate applicable to leasing/rental, under the respective specific regime; and

        2. in the case of other goods, at the rate applicable to the rental of the good;

        b) in relation to the disposal of a good that is the object of operating leasing, at the following rates:

        1. in the case of immovable property, at the rate applicable to sale, under the respective specific regime; and

        2. in the case of other goods, at the rate applicable to the sale of the good;

        c) in relation to installments of the consideration for financial leasing, at the rate provided for in art. 189 of this Complementary Law;

        d) in relation to the residual value of the leased good, the guaranteed residual value, even if paid in installments, agreed in the financial leasing contract,
  paid upon the effective exercise of the purchase option, at the following rates:

        1. in the case of immovable property, at the rate applicable to sale, under the respective specific regime; and

        2. in the case of other goods, at the rate provided for in the general levy rules referred to in Title I of this Book applicable to the sale of the good;

        II - the deduction shall be allowed, in proportion to the share of revenues obtained in operations that do not generate IBS and CBS credits for the lessee
  in relation to the total revenues from leasing operations:

        a) of financial expenses with fund-raising used in leasing operations;

        b) of leasing expenses;

        c) of provisions for doubtful debts relative to leasing operations, subject to the provisions of item V of the caput of art. 192
  of this Complementary Law. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Single paragraph. For purposes of the levy of the IBS and the CBS on financial leasing:

         I - the consideration taxed under item "c" of item I of the caput of this article must be measured taking into account the effects of the present value adjustments
  of the payment flow of the leasing contract, at the rate equivalent to the financial charges, duly disclosed in accounting accounts;

        II - the portion taxed under item "d" of item I of the caput shall correspond, at a minimum, to the acquisition cost of the leased good or service,
  regardless of the amount provided for in the contract, the same rule applying if the good is sold to a third party;

        III - the sum of the installments taxed under items "c" and "d" of item I of the caput of this article must correspond to the total amount received by the
  lessor for the financial leasing and sale of the good, during the entire term of the operation.

       Art. 202. If the legal entity records revenues from financial services referred to in items I to VI of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, the
  fund-raising financial expenses shall be deducted from the tax base in proportion to the revenues of each type.

        Art. 203. The party to a leasing contract that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime and is not subject to the specific regime
  of this Section may use credits of these taxes based on the amount of the installments of the leasing consideration and the residual value of the good,
  to the extent of actual payment, on a cash basis, at the same rate owed on these services.

                                                                                   Section V

                                                                       Of Consortium Administration

         Art. 204. In consortium administration referred to in item VII of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, for purposes of determining the tax base,
  the service revenues comprise all fees, commissions and charges, as well as the respective surcharges, penalties and interest, arising from a contract of
  participation in a consortium group, actually paid, on a cash basis.

         § 1º The consortium administrator may deduct from the tax base the amounts referring to the intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of
  art. 182 of this Complementary Law.

         § 2º Acquisitions of goods and services by a consortium member with a consortium credit letter are subject to the rules provided for in the general levy rules
  referred to in Title I of this Book, except in the case of immovable property, which is subject to the respective specific regime, and other goods or services subject to a
  differentiated or specific regime, under the terms of this Complementary Law, with the consortium administrator not being liable for these taxes.

        § 3º In the execution of a guarantee of a consortium member, with receipt of the amounts by the consortium group, the following shall be observed:

        I - the consolidation of ownership of the good by the consortium group shall not be subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS;

        II - in the disposal of the good by the consortium group:

        a) there shall be no levy of the IBS and the CBS, if the consortium member is not a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS;

        b) there shall be levy of the IBS and the CBS under the same rules that would be applicable if the disposal had been carried out by the consortium member, if the latter is a taxpayer
  of the IBS and the CBS;

        III - the same rules relative to the IBS and the CBS that would be applicable if the disposal had been carried out by the consortium member shall apply to the acquirer; and

        IV - the consortium administrator shall be subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS on the remuneration for the service rendered and shall not be liable for the taxes
  owed by the consortium member under item "b" of item II of this paragraph.

        Art. 205. The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime that acquires consortium administration services may appropriate IBS and CBS credits based
  on the amounts paid to the supplier for these services.

       Art. 206. Consortium intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law shall be subject to the levy of the IBS and
  the CBS on the value of the operation, at the same rates applicable to consortium administration services.

        § 1º Providers of consortium intermediation services that are Simples Nacional participants:

        I - shall remain taxed in accordance with the Simples Nacional rules, when they do not exercise the option for the regular IBS and CBS regime; and

        II - shall be subject to the same IBS and CBS rates applicable to consortium administration services, when they exercise the option for the
  regular IBS and CBS regime.

         § 2º Credits on intermediation operations may be used by acquirers that are taxpayers under the regular regime, provided that the
  intermediation supplier identifies the destination acquirers, based on the amounts of the IBS and the CBS paid by the intermediary and applying the provisions of
  arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.
                                                                                        Section VI

                                                 Of the Management and Administration of Resources, including Investment Funds

       Art. 207. The management and administration of resources referred to in item VIII of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law are subject to the levy of the IBS and the
  CBS under a specific regime, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

         Art. 208. The IBS and CBS rates on services provided to investment funds that are not financial services referred to in art. 182
  of this Complementary Law shall follow the general levy rules of the IBS and the CBS provided for in Title I of this Book and, if applicable, the
  differentiated regimes referred to in Title IV of this Book.

         Art. 209. The investment fund and its quotaholders may not use IBS and CBS credits owed by the suppliers of any goods or
  services to the fund, except as provided for in the single paragraph of this article.

         Single paragraph. If the investment fund is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime, the fund may appropriate credits on its
  acquisitions of goods and services, subject to the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 210. The investment fund administrator and the distributor acting on behalf of and for the account of quotas of an investment fund must submit, in the manner
  of the regulation, as an ancillary obligation, information on the investment fund and each quotaholder, or on the distributor acting on behalf of and for the account of, or on the central depository
  if the quota is traded on a stock exchange, and the value of its quotas, without prejudice to other information that the regulation may require.

       Single paragraph. The IBS Management Committee may enter into an agreement with public administration agencies to have access to the information provided for in the caput,
  and may, in such case, exempt the administrator and the distributor from the ancillary obligation referred to in the caput of this article.

         Art. 211. Management and administration of resources services provided to the investor and not to the investment fund, as in the management of
  managed portfolios, are subject to the IBS and the CBS at the rates provided for in art. 189 of this Complementary Law, with the IBS and CBS credit being prohibited for the acquirer of the
  services.

                                                                                        Section VII

                         Of the Severance Indemnity Fund (FGTS) and other Guarantee Funds and Public Policy Executing Funds

        Art. 212. Operations related to the Severance Indemnity Fund (FGTS) are subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS, at a
  nationally uniform rate, to be fixed so as to maintain the tax burden levied on these operations.

        Art. 212. Operations related to the Severance Indemnity Fund (FGTS) are subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS, at
  nationally uniform rates, calculated under the terms of item II of § 1º of art. 10 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023. (Wording given
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 1º The FGTS is not a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS.

          § 2º Operations related to the FGTS are those necessary for the application of Law No. 8,036, of May 11, 1990, carried out:

          I - by the FGTS operating agent;

          II - by the FGTS financial agents; and

          III - by the other banking establishments.

          § 3º The following are subject to:

          I - a zero rate of the IBS and the CBS, the operations provided for in item I of § 2º of this article;

          I - in the case of the operations provided for in item I of § 2º of this article, a zero rate of the IBS and the CBS;          (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

          II - the rates necessary to maintain the tax burden, the operations provided for in items II and III of § 2º of this article.

        II - in the case of the operations provided for in items II and III of § 2º of this article, the IBS and CBS rates that shall be fixed so that the sum of the
  rates corresponds to: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) in 2027, to 1.0% (one percent);      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) in 2028, to 1.0% (one percent);      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          c) in 2029, to 1.2% (one point two percent);       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          d) in 2030, to 1.4% (one point four percent);        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          e) in 2031, to 1.6% (one point six percent);       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          f) in 2032, to 1.8% (one point eight percent); and      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          g) as of 2033, to 3.0% (three percent).   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 4º Observing, each year, the proportion between the CBS and IBS rates under the terms of § 2º of art. 189 of this Complementary Law, the CBS
  and IBS rates shall be fixed so that the sum of the rates corresponds to the percentage fixed in the items of item II of § 3º of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

        § 5º The provisions of Section III of this Chapter II apply to the operations referred to in items II and III of § 2º of this article, insofar as they are not
  contrary thereto. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 6º The provisions of § 6º of art. 233 apply to the rates referred to in item II of § 3º of this article.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 7º The rates referred to in item II of § 3º of this article shall be levied on the value of the financial services related to the FGTS, excluding:         (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - the IBS and the CBS; and   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - the tax referred to in art. 156, item III, of the Federal Constitution.   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)
         Art. 213. Operations related to other guarantee and public-policy-executing funds are not subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS,
  including housing and regional development funds, provided for by law.



        § 1º Operations related to the guarantee and executing funds referred to in the caput of this article include administration and
  operationalization services provided to the fund.

        § 2º The funds referred to in the caput of this article are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS.

       § 3º The provisions of this article also apply to the funds referred to in the caput that come to be constituted after the date of publication of this Complementary
  Law.

         § 4º It shall be incumbent on a joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the RFB to list the guarantee and public-policy-executing funds provided for by law as of the date of the
  publication of this Complementary Law and to update the list with funds of the same nature that come to be constituted subsequently.

                                                                                   Section VIII

                                                                         Of Payment Arrangements

       Art. 214. The payment arrangement services referred to in item IX of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law are subject to the incidence of the IBS and the
  CBS under a specific regime, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

        § 1º The services referred to in the caput of this article comprise all of those related to the accreditation, capture, processing and settlement of
  payment transactions and to the other goods and services supplied to the accredited party, to another recipient of the arrangement, and among participants of the arrangement, including:

        I - the arrangement services remunerated by the accredited party by means of a discount fee on payment transactions;

        II - the leasing of electronic terminals and the supply of computer programs (software) that enable the functioning of payment arrangements; and

         III - goods and services supplied by the founders of payment arrangements to the other participants of the arrangement, even if the charge is not linked to
  each payment transaction;

        IV - goods and services imported from card brands by founders and participants of payment arrangements.

         § 2º The legal relationship between the issuer and the holder of the payment instrument is subject to the rules provided for in the general incidence rules referred to in
  Title I of this Book, except for the credit operations referred to in item I of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law, which are subject to their respective specific
  regime.

        § 3º The tax base of the IBS and the CBS owed by taxpayers subject to the specific regime of this Section shall correspond to the gross value of the remuneration
  received directly from the accredited party, plus the amounts received from other participants of the payment arrangement and minus the amounts paid to them.

         § 3º The tax base of the IBS and the CBS owed by taxpayers subject to the specific regime of this Section shall correspond to the gross value of the
  remuneration effectively received from the accredited party, from the founder of the arrangement, or from other participants, guaranteeing the right to the credit corresponding to the amounts
  paid to them, provided that the IBS and CBS debits have been duly extinguished. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 4º The provisions of § 3º of this article apply for purposes of determining the tax base of the participants of the arrangements referred to in the caput of art. 216 of this
  Complementary Law.

         § 5º The income earned as a result of the
  investment of funds available in payment accounts, in accordance with the regulation of the Central Bank of Brazil and the National Monetary Council, also form part of the tax base of the services referred to in the caput of art. 216 of this Complementary Law, minus the
  amounts of income paid in favor of the holders of such accounts.

         § 6º The provisions of § 3º do not imply recognition of the existence of a contracting or subcontracting relationship between the founder of the arrangement and other
  participants, nor the inclusion of the amounts passed on to other participants or to the founder in the tax base of the taxes that will be extinguished as provided for in
  Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         Art. 215. The accredited party shall be considered the recipient of the payment arrangement services related to accreditation, capture, processing and
  settlement of payment transactions.

        Art. 216. The recipient of the service shall be considered the recipient of the services in the case of payment arrangements not provided for in art. 215
  of this Complementary Law.

          Art. 217. Without prejudice to other information required by regulation, participants in payment arrangements shall submit, in the manner provided by the
  regulation, as an ancillary obligation, the following information: (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
          I - in the case of the accrediting entity, the identification of the accredited parties, the gross amounts of remuneration of each accredited party and the amounts passed on to each of the
  other participants of the arrangement; and
          II - in the case of the other participants of the arrangement, the gross amounts of remuneration received from recipients or other participants of the arrangement and the
  amounts paid to other participants of the arrangement.
          Sole paragraph. In the case of a sub-accrediting entity and other companies that come to participate in payment arrangements and are not provided for in items I
  and II of the caput of this article, the form of the ancillary obligations shall be set out in the regulation.

        Art. 218. The accredited party or another recipient of an arrangement that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime may appropriate credits of the IBS and the
  CBS calculated on the basis of the gross amounts of remuneration owed to the accrediting entity or another participant of the arrangement, in the same amounts of the IBS and the CBS
  paid by the participants of the payment arrangement levied on the operations.

        Art. 218-A. To enable the operationalization of the provisions of § 3º of art. 214, the regulation shall:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         I - provide for specific payment deadlines for the founder and the different participants of the arrangement, including shorter deadlines than those applicable to the
  participants of the arrangement that settle amounts directly to the accredited parties and other recipients of the arrangement; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - establish:   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) cases of withholding of the IBS and the CBS, which shall observe the provisions of art. 36 of this Complementary Law;           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        b) the case in which the founder of the arrangement and the other participants that initiate the financial flow to another participant of the arrangement, including through a
  clearing or settlement chamber, carry out the early extinguishment of the taxes levied on the amount of their own remuneration, by any of the
  methods provided for in art. 27 of this Complementary Law; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        c) that, in cases in which the regulation permits the consolidated recording of operations, the collection document relating to the payment referred to in
  item "a" of this item must identify it. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 1º The taxpayer that settles amounts directly to the accredited parties shall provide the information necessary to attribute to them the IBS and CBS credits
  referred to in art. 218 of this Complementary Law, as well as for the allocation of the proceeds of the collection, in the manner provided by the regulation, exempting the founder of the
  arrangement and the other participants from this obligation. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 2º The regulation of the procedures provided for in this article shall seek to avoid altering the financial and operational flows of the founders and
  other participants of the arrangement. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


        Art. 219. The early settlement of receivables of payment arrangements shall be taxed by the IBS and the CBS in the manner set out in this article.

         § 1º The tax base of the IBS and the CBS shall correspond to the discount applied in the early settlement, with the deduction of an amount corresponding to the future interest rate curve
  of the DI rate, for the anticipation period.

        § 2º Losses incurred in the receipt of credits and losses on the assignment of such credits and on the
  granting of discounts may be deducted from the tax base referred to in § 1º, provided they are carried out at market value.

        § 3º Losses referred to in § 2º that cannot be fully deducted from the tax base of a given assessment period, because they exceed the
  taxable amounts in such period, may be deducted in subsequent periods.

        § 4º The rate of the IBS and the CBS levied on the operations referred to in the caput of this article shall be equal to the rate applied to the other payment arrangement
  services.

         § 5º The recipient of the early settlement services for receivables of payment arrangements that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime
  may take credit for the IBS and the CBS on such operations, in relation to the portion of the discount applied, at the time of early settlement, on a cash basis, that
  is greater than the future interest rate curve of the DI rate, for the anticipation period.

        § 6º The provisions of this article also apply to the FIDC and other investment funds that early-settle receivables of payment
  arrangements, which shall be considered taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS if they are not classified as investment entities, in accordance with the provisions of art.
  23 of Law No. 14,754, of December 12, 2023, and its regulation.

        § 7º Unit holders of the funds referred to in § 6º of this article are not subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS.

        Art. 219-A. The administration of loyalty programs shall be taxed in the manner set out in this article, in which case:         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        I - the tax base of the IBS and the CBS shall correspond, in each assessment period, to the value of the points issued, minus the amounts paid upon redemption
  of the points and those reimbursed for points not used computed as revenue; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the acquirer of the points shall not be entitled to the IBS and CBS credit.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         Sole paragraph. The specific regime referred to in this article also applies to the issuer's own loyalty programs in which the points are used
  as consideration in the supply of goods and services by the issuer of the points itself, in which case the points used as consideration will be
  deducted from the tax base based on the value considered in setting the tax base of the IBS and the CBS in the operation, under the terms of item III of § 4º of
  art. 12 of this Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                    Section IX

                     Of the Activities of Entities Administering Organized Markets, Market Infrastructures and Central Depositories

        Art. 220. The activities of entities administering organized markets, market infrastructures and central depositories referred to in item X of the
  caput of art. 182 are subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS on the value of the service supply operation, at the rates provided for in art. 189 of this Complementary
  Law.

        Art. 221. The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime that acquires services from entities administering organized markets, market infrastructures
  and central depositories referred to in item X of the caput of art. 182 may appropriate credits of these taxes, based on the amounts paid to the
  supplier.

        Art. 222. Entities administering organized markets, market infrastructures and central depositories shall provide, as an ancillary
  obligation, in the manner provided by the regulation, information on the acquirers of the services and the amounts paid by each one.

                                                                                    Section X

                                                   Of Insurance, Reinsurance, Supplementary Pension Plans and Capitalization

         Art. 223. For purposes of determining the tax base, in insurance and reinsurance operations referred to, respectively, in items XI and XII of the caput
  of art. 182 of this Complementary Law:

        I - the service revenues comprise the following, to the extent effectively received, on a cash basis:

        a) those earned from insurance premiums, accepted coinsurance, reinsurance and retrocession; and

       b) the financial revenues of the financial assets guaranteeing technical provisions, in proportion to the revenues referred to in item "a" in operations that do not
  generate IBS and CBS credits for the acquirers, and the total revenues referred to in item "a" of this item, observing criteria established in the regulation;

        II - the following shall be deducted:

         a) indemnity expenses relating to insurance for elementary lines and for persons without survival coverage, exclusively when relating to
  insured natural or legal persons that are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime, corresponding to claims,
  effectively paid, occurring in insurance operations, after subtracting salvage and other reimbursements;

        b) amounts paid relating to premium refunds that have been computed as revenue, including upon cancellation; and

        c) amounts paid relating to insurance and reinsurance intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law;

        d) amounts paid relating to the premium of ceded coinsurance operations;

        e) the portions of premiums allocated to the constitution of technical provisions or reserves relating to redeemable insurance.

       § 1º The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime that acquires and is the insured party of insurance and reinsurance services may appropriate credits of IBS and
  CBS on the premiums, in the amount of taxes paid on such services.

         § 2º The receipt of the indemnities referred to in item "a" of item II of the caput of this article is not subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS and does not give the right to
  IBS and CBS credit.

         § 3º The portion of the reversal of technical provisions or reserves that is retained by the entity as its own revenue forms part of the tax base referred to in this article
  .

        § 4º Reinsurance and retrocession operations are subject to a zero rate, including when reinsurance and retrocession premiums are
  ceded abroad.

       Art. 224. For purposes of determining the tax base, in supplementary pension plans, open and closed, referred to in item XIII of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary
  Law, and in life insurance with survival coverage:


        I - the service revenues comprise, to the extent effectively received, on a cash basis:

        a) contributions to supplementary pension plans;

        b) premiums for life insurance with survival coverage; and

        c) the fund charge arising from structuring and maintaining supplementary pension plans and life insurance with survival coverage;

        II - the following shall be deducted:

        a) the portions of contributions and premiums allocated to the constitution of technical provisions or reserves;

        b) amounts paid relating to refunds of contributions and premiums that have been computed as revenue, including cancellations;

        c) amounts paid for supplementary pension plan intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law and for
  life insurance intermediation with survival coverage; and

        d) indemnity expenses relating to risk coverages, corresponding to benefits effectively paid, occurring in
  supplementary pension plan operations.

        § 1º The portion of the reversal of technical provisions or reserves retained by the entity as its own revenue forms part of the tax base referred to in this article.

        § 2º Income earned on the investment of financial resources intended for the payment of
  retirement, pension, lump-sum and redemption benefits does not form part of the tax base referred to in this article.

        § 3º The provisions of § 2º of this article apply to income:

        I - from financial investments provided by the assets guaranteeing technical provisions, such assets being limited to the amount of the said provisions; and

        II - from the financial assets guaranteeing the technical provisions of private insurance companies intended exclusively for pension benefit plans
  and for life insurance with survival coverage.

         § 4º Also not forming part of the tax base referred to in this article are the other financial investment income earned by entities that provide
  the activities set out in the caput of this article.

        Art. 225. For purposes of determining the tax base, in capitalization referred to in item XIV of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law:

        I - the service revenues comprise, to the extent effectively received, on a cash basis:

        a) collections from capitalization bonds; and

        b) revenues from lapses and penalties;

        II - the following shall be deducted:

        a) portions of contributions allocated to the constitution of technical provisions or reserves, including provisions for prizes payable;

        b) amounts paid relating to cancellations and refunds of bonds that have been computed as revenue; and

        c) amounts paid for capitalization intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1º The portion of the reversal of technical provisions or reserves retained by the entity as its own revenue forms part of the tax base referred to in this article.

          § 2º Income earned on financial investments intended for the payment of redemption of
  bonds and drawing prizes does not form part of the tax base referred to in this article.

         § 3º The provisions of § 2º of this article are restricted to income from financial investments provided by the assets guaranteeing technical provisions,
  such assets being limited to the amount of the said provisions.

         § 4º Also not forming part of the tax base referred to in this article are the other financial investment income earned by entities that provide
  the activities set out in the caput of this article.

         § 5º The taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime that acquires capitalization bonds may appropriate credits of IBS and CBS in the amount of the
  taxes paid on such service.

        Art. 226. Credit for the IBS and the CBS is prohibited on the acquisition of supplementary pension plan services.

        Art. 227. Without prejudice to other information required by regulation, insurance companies, reinsurers, open and closed supplementary
  pension entities and capitalization companies shall submit, in the manner provided by the regulation, as an ancillary obligation, the following information:

         I - insurance companies and reinsurers, the identification of the insured parties or, in cases where the insured parties are not identified in the insurance contract, of the
  policyholders and the premium amounts paid by each one;

        II - supplementary pension entities, the identification of the participants and the contribution amounts paid by each one; and

        III - capitalization companies, the identification of the holders, subscribers or distributors of the bonds and the amounts collected from the bonds.

        Art. 228. Insurance, reinsurance, supplementary pension plan and capitalization intermediation services referred to in item XV of the caput of art. 182 of this
  Complementary Law shall be subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS on the value of the operation, at the same rate applicable to insurance, reinsurance,
  supplementary pension plan and capitalization services.

        § 1º Providers of insurance, reinsurance, supplementary pension plan and capitalization intermediation services that opt for the Simples
  Nacional:

        I - shall remain taxed in accordance with the Simples Nacional rules, when they do not exercise the option for the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS; and

        II - shall be subject to the same rate of the IBS and the CBS applicable to insurance, reinsurance, supplementary pension plan and capitalization services, when
  they exercise the option for the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 2º Credits from intermediation operations may be used by insured acquirers of the respective insurance and reinsurance and by
  acquirers of capitalization bonds that are taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS in the regular regime, provided that the supplier of the intermediation identifies the
  acquirers and recipients, based on the amounts of the IBS and the CBS paid by the intermediary and applying the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                      Section XI


                                                                        Of Virtual Asset Services

         Art. 229. Virtual asset services referred to in item XVI of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law are subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS on
  the value of the virtual asset service provided.

          § 1º The virtual assets referred to in the caput of this article are digital representations of value that can be traded or transferred by electronic means
  and used to make payments or for investment purposes, under the terms of Law No. 14,478, of December 21, 2022, not including
  digital representations considered securities, which are subject to the provisions of Section III of this Chapter.

         § 2o The acquisition of goods and services with virtual assets is subject to the rules provided for in the general incidence rules referred to in Title I of this
  Book or to the respective differentiated or specific regime applicable to the good or service acquired, under the terms of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 230. The taxpayer in the regular regime that acquires virtual asset services may appropriate credits of the IBS and the CBS, based on the amounts paid to the
  supplier.

                                                                                    Section XII

                                                                    Of the Importation of Financial Services

        Art. 231. Financial services referred to in art. 182 of this Complementary Law, when considered imported, under the terms of Section II of Chapter
  IV of Title I of this Book, are subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS at the same rate applicable to the respective financial services acquired from suppliers
  domiciled in the Country.

        § 1º In the importation of financial services:

        I - the tax base shall be the amount corresponding to the revenue earned by the supplier as a result of the operation, with the application of a reduction factor to
  account for a presumed margin, to be provided for in the regulation, observing the limits established in this Chapter for the tax base deductions of the
  same financial services provided in the Country, when applicable;

         II - in cases where the importer of the financial services is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS subject to the regular regime and is entitled to appropriate
  credits of these taxes on the acquisition of the same financial service in the Country, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a zero rate shall be applied on importation, and
  IBS and CBS credits shall not be appropriated; and

        III - (VETOED).

         IV - in cases where the importer of the financial services is a taxpayer that carries out the operations referred to in items I to V of the caput of
  art. 182, a zero rate shall be applied on importation, without prejudice to maintaining the right to deduct such expenses from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS,
  in accordance with the provisions of art. 192 of this Complementary Law.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2º The provisions of Chapter IV of Title I of this Book apply to importations of financial services, insofar as they do not conflict with the provisions of this article.

        § 3º The zero rate provided for in item IV of § 1º of this article does not apply in the case of the importation of financial services from a related party on the
  portion of the value of the operation that exceeds the prices and fees usually practiced under market conditions.              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

                                                                                    Section XIII

                                                                    Of the Exportation of Financial Services

        Art. 232. Financial services referred to in art. 182 of this Complementary Law, when provided to residents or persons domiciled abroad, shall be
  considered exported and shall be immune to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS, for purposes of the provisions of Chapter V of Title I of this Book.

        § 1º An entity that provides financial services in the Country and by way of exportation shall:

        I - in the operations referred to in items I to V of the caput of art. 182 of this Complementary Law:

        a) calculate the proportion of export revenue to total revenue with such financial services;

        b) reverse the effect of the tax base deductions permitted for such financial services in the same proportion referred to in this item; and

         II - in the other operations subject to the specific regime for financial services, make the same calculation provided for in item I of this paragraph,
  taking into account the revenues of operations of each nature, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and, when applicable, the permission to deduct expenses from the tax
  base of the respective operations.

         § 2º Financial services provided to entities abroad that are branches, subsidiaries or investees, predominantly,
  of residents or persons domiciled in the Country that are not taxpayers of the IBS and the CBS in the regular regime, individually or together with
  related parties, as defined in §§ 2º to 6o of art. 5º of this Complementary Law, are not considered exported.

        § 3º In the case of operations carried out in the financial and capital markets under the terms of the regulation of the National Monetary Council, the provisions of §
  2º of this article shall apply exclusively in cases where information about the entity abroad being controlled or invested in, predominantly, by
  residents or persons domiciled in the Country, is indicated by the legal representative of such entity abroad, in the registry referred to in art. 59 of this Complementary Law,
  as provided for in the regulation.

                                                                                    Section XIV

                                                                            Transitional Provisions

       Art. 233. From 2027 to 2033, the rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on financial services referred to in art. 189 of this Complementary Law shall be set
  so as to maintain the tax burden levied on the credit operations of banking financial institutions.

         Art. 233. From 2027 to 2033, the sum of the rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on financial services referred to in art. 189 of this Complementary Law,
  calculated under the terms of item II of § 1º of art. 10 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, shall correspond to:         (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - in 2027 and 2028, 10.85% (ten point eighty-five percent);      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - in 2029, 11.00% (eleven percent); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - in 2030, 11.15% (eleven point fifteen percent); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        IV - in 2031, 11.30% (eleven point thirty percent); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        V - in 2032, 11.50% (eleven point fifty percent); and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


          VI - in 2033, 12.50% (twelve point fifty percent). (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 1º The calculation of the rate referred to in the caput of this article shall be made in accordance with the following criteria:    (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)
         I - the proportion of the tax base of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins of banking financial institutions relating to:
         a) fees and commissions; and
         b) other revenues shall be calculated;
         II - the debits of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins of banking financial institutions on the other revenues referred to in
  item "b" of item I of this paragraph shall be calculated;
         III - the amounts of the IPI, the Tax on Services of Any Nature (ISS), the ICMS, the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins
  levied on acquisitions by banking financial institutions and not recovered as credits shall be calculated, in the proportion that the other revenues referred to in
  item "b" of item I of this paragraph represent of the total tax base of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins; and
         IV - the amount of the debits of the IBS and the CBS on the tax base of the financial services referred to in items I to III of the caput of art. 182 of this
  Complementary Law provided by banking financial institutions, without taking into account operations with debt securities subject to a public offering excluded
  from the tax base under the terms of §§ 1º and 2º of art. 195 of this Complementary Law, shall be equal to the sum of the amount of the debits of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep
  and Cofins referred to in item II and the amounts of taxes not recovered as credits referred to in item III of this paragraph.

          § 1º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 2º The calculation referred to in § 1º of this article shall be made based on data for the period from January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2023.       (Repealed by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3º Observing, each year, the proportion between the rates of the CBS and the IBS under the terms of § 2º of art. 189 of this Complementary Law, the rates of the CBS and
  of the IBS shall be set so that the joint debit of the two taxes meets the provisions of item IV of § 1º of this article.

        § 3º Observing, each year, the proportion between the rates of the CBS and the IBS under the terms of § 2º of art. 189 of this Complementary Law, the rates of the CBS
  and of the IBS shall be set so that the sum of the rates corresponds to the percentage set out in the items of the caput of this article.        (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 4º The calculation methodology for setting the rates referred to in the caput of this article shall be approved by joint act of the Minister of State for Finance and
  the IBS Management Committee, after consultation and approval by the Federal Court of Accounts within a period not exceeding 180 (one hundred and eighty) days. (Repealed by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 4º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 5º The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities shall provide the IBS Management Committee and the Executive Branch of the Union with the subsidies necessary for
  the calculation of the rates of the IBS and the CBS, by means of the sharing of data and information. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 5º (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 6º The rates of the CBS and the IBS shall be disclosed:

          I - as regards the IBS, by the States, the Municipalities and the Federal District, in a shared and integrated manner, by act of the IBS Management Committee; and

          II - as regards the CBS, by act of the head of the Executive Branch of the Union.

        § 7º For purposes of this article, banking financial institutions are considered to be banks of any kind and savings banks (caixas econômicas).        (Repealed
  by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 7º (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8º The rates set in accordance with the procedure established in this article, in relation to the provisions of item III of § 1º, shall be set taking into
  account the transition rule established in Title VIII of this Book, so that the respective impact on the rates of the IBS and the CBS is introduced
  proportionally to the reduction and elimination of the taxes that will be extinguished. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 8º (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 9º The rates referred to in the items of the caput of this article shall be levied on the value of financial services, excluding:                   (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - the IBS and the CBS; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - the tax referred to in art. 156, III, of the Federal Constitution. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 10. In the case of financial services on which the tax referred to in art. 156, III, of the Federal Constitution is levied, the sum of the rates provided
  for in the items of the caput of this article shall be reduced: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - in 2027 and 2028, by 2 p.p. (two percentage points); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - in 2029, by 1.8 p.p. (one point eight tenths of a percentage point); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - in 2030, by 1.6 p.p. (one point six tenths of a percentage point); (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          IV - in 2031, by 1.4 p.p. (one point four tenths of a percentage point); and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          V - in 2032, by 1.2 p.p. (one point two tenths of a percentage point). (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                   CHAPTER III

                                                                    OF HEALTH ASSISTANCE PLANS

        Art. 234. Health assistance plans are subject to a specific regime of incidence of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, in
  cases where such services are provided by:

          I - health insurers;

          II - benefits administrators;

          III - cooperatives operating health plans;

          IV - health insurance cooperatives; and

          V - other operators of health assistance plans.
        Art. 235. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS under the specific regime for health assistance plans shall be composed:

        I - of the revenue from the services, comprising:

        a) premiums and consideration, including for co-responsibility assumed, effectively received, on a cash basis; and

        b) financial revenues, in the assessment period, from the assets guaranteeing technical reserves, effectively settled;

        II - with the deduction:

        a) of the indemnities corresponding to events that occurred, effectively paid, on a cash basis;

        b) of amounts relating to cancellations and refunds of premiums and consideration that have been computed as revenue;

        c) of amounts paid for health plan intermediation services; and

       d) of the administration fee paid to the benefits administrators and other amounts paid to other entities provided for in art. 234 of this
  Complementary Law.

         § 1º For purposes of item "a" of item II of the caput of this article, indemnities corresponding to events that occurred means the total assistance costs
  arising from beneficiaries' use of the coverage offered by the health plans, comprising:

        I - goods and services acquired directly by the entity from natural and legal persons; and

        II - reimbursements to insured persons or beneficiaries for goods and services acquired by them from natural and legal persons.

         § 2º Operations by way of co-responsibility ceded between the entities provided for in art. 234 of this Complementary Law shall also be considered assistance
  costs under the terms of § 1º and shall be deducted from the tax base for purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article.

        § 3º Co-responsibility ceded referred to in § 2º of this article means the making available of services by one operator to beneficiaries of another, with
  the corresponding assumption of the risk of the provision.

       § 4º For purposes of item "b" of item I of the caput of this article, financial revenues shall be considered effectively settled when there is,
  cumulatively:

        I - the settlement or redemption of the respective guaranteeing asset; and

        II - the reduction of technical provisions backed by the guaranteeing asset, considering the difference between the total value of technical provisions in the assessment period
  and in the immediately preceding period.

          § 5º Reimbursements to insured persons or beneficiaries referred to in item II of § 1º of this article are not subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS and do not give
  rise to credits.

        § 6º Financial revenues that have no connection with the allocation of funds arising from the
  receipt of premiums and consideration paid by contracting parties of health assistance plans shall not form part of the tax base of the IBS and the CBS.

        Art. 236. Funeral assistance plans are subject to the provisions of arts. 234 to 242 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 237. The rates of IBS and CBS under the specific regime for health assistance plans are nationally uniform and correspond to the reference
  rates of each federative sphere, reduced by 60% (sixty percent).

        Art. 238. Credit for the IBS and the CBS is prohibited for acquirers of health assistance plans.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of the caput of this article do not apply to the case referred to in item "f" of item IV of § 2º of art. 57 of this Complementary Law, in
  which the IBS and CBS credits to be used by the contracting party that is a taxpayer in the regular regime:

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of the caput of this article do not apply to the case referred to in item "f" of item IV of § 3º of art. 57 of this Complementary Law,
  in which the IBS and CBS credits to be used by the contracting party that is a taxpayer in the regular regime: (Wording given by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

        I - shall be equivalent to the multiplication of:

        a) the amounts of the IBS and CBS debits paid by the entity subject to the specific regime referred to in this Chapter in the assessment period; and

        b) the proportion between:

        1. the total premiums and consideration corresponding to the coverage of the contracting party's employee-holders and their dependents, in the assessment
  period; and

        2. the total premiums and consideration collected by the entity, in the same assessment period;

        II - do not reach the portion of premiums and consideration whose financial burden has been passed on to employees; and

        III - shall be appropriated based on the information provided by suppliers to the IBS Management Committee and the RFB, in the manner provided by the regulation, and shall be subject
  to the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 239. The entities referred to in this Chapter shall submit, as an ancillary obligation, in the manner provided by the regulation, information on the identity
  of the natural persons who are the holder-beneficiaries of the health assistance plans and the amounts of premiums and consideration for each one.

        § 1º In collective plans where there is no individualization of the amount of premiums and consideration per holder natural person, the operator may allocate, in the
  ancillary obligation referred to in the caput of this article, the total amount received to each holder natural person in accordance with criteria to be established in the regulation.

        § 2º In collective plans by adhesion contracted with the participation or intermediation of a benefits administrator, the latter shall be responsible for the
  submission of the information provided for in the caput and in § 1º of this article.

         Art. 240. Health assistance plan intermediation services are subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS on the value of the operation at the same
  rate applicable to the health assistance plan.

        Sole paragraph. Providers of health assistance plan intermediation services that opt for the Simples Nacional:

        I - shall remain taxed in accordance with the Simples Nacional rules, in cases where they do not exercise the option for the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS; and

        II - shall be subject to the same rate of the IBS and the CBS applicable to health assistance plan services, in cases where they exercise the option for the regular
  regime of the IBS and the CBS.


         Art. 241. Should the importation of health assistance plan services come to be permitted, the IBS and the CBS shall be levied at the same
  rate applicable to operations carried out in the Country on the value of the operation, and the regulation may provide for a reduction factor to account for a presumed
  margin, observing the limits established in this Chapter for the tax base deductions of such services.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of Chapter IV of Title I of this Book apply to importations referred to in the caput of this article, insofar as they do not conflict with the
  provisions of this article.

         Art. 242. Should the supply of health assistance plan services to residents or persons domiciled abroad for use
  abroad come to be permitted, such supply shall be considered an export and shall be immune to the IBS and the CBS, for purposes of the provisions of Chapter V of Title I of this Book.

         Art. 243. Pet health assistance plans are subject to the provisions of arts. 234 to 242 of this Complementary Law, with the exception of the
  applicable rates, which shall be nationally uniform and shall correspond to the sum of the reference rates of each federative sphere, reduced by 30% (thirty
  percent), with credit to the acquirer prohibited.

                                                                                  CHAPTER IV

                                                                    OF PROGNOSTIC CONTESTS (LOTTERIES AND BETTING)

                                                                                      Section I

                                                                               General Provisions

       Art. 244. Prognostic contests, in physical or virtual form, comprising all lottery modalities, including fixed-odds betting and
  sweepstakes, horse racing bets and other bets, are subject to a specific regime of incidence of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of this Chapter apply to fantasy sport.

        Art. 245. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS on prognostic contests is the entity's own revenue arising from that activity, corresponding to the
  proceeds of collection, with the deduction of:

        I - prizes paid; and

        II - mandatory allocations by law to a public body or fund and to other beneficiaries.

        Sole paragraph. Prizes paid are not subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS.

        Art. 246. The rates of the IBS and the CBS on prognostic contests are nationally uniform and correspond to the sum of the reference rates of the
  federative spheres.

        Art. 247. Credit for the IBS and the CBS is prohibited for bettors of prognostic contests.

        Art. 248. The company that operates prognostic contests shall submit an ancillary obligation, in the manner provided by the regulation, containing, at a minimum, information
  on the place where the bet is made and the amounts of bets and prizes paid.

        Sole paragraph. If bets are made virtually, in the ancillary obligation referred to in the caput of this article, the
  bettor shall be identified.

                                                                                     Section II

                                                         Of the Importation of Prognostic Contest Services

         Art. 249. Should the importation of prognostic contest services come to be permitted, entities domiciled abroad that provide, by virtual means,
  prognostic contest services referred to in this Chapter to bettors residing or domiciled in the Country shall be subject to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS at the same
  rate provided for prognostic contests in the Country.

       § 1º The supplier of the service referred to in the caput of this article is the taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS, and the bettor may be jointly liable for
  payment in the cases provided for in art. 24 of this Complementary Law.

       § 2º The tax base is the revenue earned by the entity as a result of the operation, with the application of a reduction factor provided for in the regulation, calculated
  based on the tax base deductions of prognostic contest services in the Country.

        § 3º The provisions of Chapter IV of Title I of this Book apply to importations referred to in this Section, insofar as they do not conflict with the provisions of this article.

                                                                                     Section III

                                                         Of the Exportation of Prognostic Contest Services

        Art. 250. Prognostic contest services provided, by virtual means, to residents or persons domiciled abroad shall be considered exported,
  and shall be immune to the incidence of the IBS and the CBS, for purposes of the provisions of Chapter V of Title I of this Book.

        § 1º The regulation shall provide for the manner of proving residence or domicile abroad for purposes of the caput of this article.

         § 2º Prognostic contest services provided in the physical presence, within national territory, of a resident or person domiciled abroad shall not be considered
  exported.

                                                                                   CHAPTER V

                                                                              OF REAL PROPERTY

                                                                                      Section I

                                                                               General Provisions

         Art. 251. Operations with real property carried out by taxpayers who assess the IBS and the CBS under the regular regime are subject to the specific regime
  provided for in this Chapter.

        § 1º Natural persons who carry out operations with real property shall be considered taxpayers of the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS and subject to the regime
  referred to in this Chapter, in the following cases:

        I - lease, onerous assignment and letting of real property, provided that, in the preceding calendar year:

        a) the total revenue from such operations exceeds R$ 240,000 (two hundred and forty thousand reais); and

        b) they relate to more than 3 (three) distinct real properties;


        II - disposal or assignment of rights to real property, provided they relate to more than 3 (three) distinct properties in the preceding calendar year;

        III - disposal or assignment of rights, in the preceding calendar year, of more than 1 (one) real property built by the disposing party themselves in the 5 (five) years prior to the
  date of disposal.

          § 2º The natural person referred to in the caput of § 1º of this article shall also be considered a taxpayer of the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS in the calendar year itself,
  in relation to the following operations:

        I - the disposal or assignment of rights to properties that exceeds the limits provided for in items II and III of § 1º of this article; and

        II - the lease, onerous assignment or letting of real property in an amount that exceeds by 20% (twenty percent) the limit provided for in item "a" of item I of § 1º
  of this article.

        § 3º For purposes of item II of § 1º of this article, the properties relating to the operations must have been held in the taxpayer's assets for less than 5 (five)
  years counted from the date of their acquisition.

        § 4º In the case of real property received by division of marital property, donation or inheritance, the period referred to in § 3º of this article shall be counted from acquisition
  by the spouse from whom the property was divided, the deceased, or the donor.

         § 5º The amount provided for in item "a" of item I of § 1º shall be updated monthly as from the date of publication of this Complementary Law by the IPCA or by
  another index that comes to replace it.

        § 6º The regulation shall define what constitutes distinct real properties, for purposes of items I and II of § 1º of the caput.

        § 7º The provisions of Title I of this Book apply, insofar as applicable, with respect to other rules not provided for in this Chapter.

        Art. 252. The IBS and the CBS are levied, under the terms of this Chapter, on the following operations with real property:

        I - disposal, including that arising from real estate development and land subdivision;

        II - onerous assignment and transfer or constitutive acts of real rights;

        III - lease, onerous assignment and letting;

        IV - administration and intermediation services; and

        V - civil construction services.

        § 1º The following are subject to taxation by the IBS and the CBS under the same rules as the lease, onerous assignment and letting of real property:

        I - servitude, assignment of use or of space;

        II - the granting of use, the right of passage; and

        III - (VETOED).

        § 2º The IBS and the CBS are not levied in the following cases:

        I - in exchange operations of real property, except on the equalization payment (torna), which shall be taxed under the terms of this Chapter;

       I - in exchange operations between real properties, except on the equalization payment (torna), which shall be taxed under the terms of this Chapter;                     (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - in the constitution or transfer of real security rights; and

         III - in the operations provided for in this article, when carried out by organizations managing endowment funds, constituted under the terms of Law No. 13,800, of
  January 4, 2019, for purposes of investment of the endowment fund.

        § 3º In the case referred to in item I of § 2º of this article, the exchanged amount shall not be considered in the value of the operation for the calculation of the adjustment reducer
  referred to in art. 258 of this Complementary Law.

         § 4º For purposes of this Chapter, operations with real property referred to in item III of § 2º of this article are not considered operations of a
  taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS.

        § 5º In exchanges of properties carried out between taxpayers of the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS:

        § 5º In exchanges between real properties carried out between taxpayers of the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS:              (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        I - the value of the adjustment reducer of the property given in exchange is maintained, and may be used in future operations with the property received in exchange; and

        II - in the case of an exchange for delivery of units to be built, the adjustment reducer shall be applied proportionally to the operation of each party to the exchange, taking
  as a basis the ideal fraction of the exchanged units.

        § 5º-A. In exchanges between properties carried out between a taxpayer of the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS and a non-taxpayer of the regular regime:             (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - no adjustment reducer shall be constituted for the property received in exchange by the non-taxpayer of the regular regime; and          (Included by Complementary Law
  No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the value of the adjustment reducer of the property received in exchange by the taxpayer of the regular regime shall correspond to:             (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

        a) if there is no equalization payment (torna), the value of the adjustment reducer of the property given by them in exchange;          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) if there is payment of an equalization payment (torna) by the taxpayer of the regular regime, the value of the adjustment reducer of the property given by them in exchange, plus
  the value of the equalization payment; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         c) if there is payment of an equalization payment (torna) by the non-taxpayer of the regular regime, the value of the adjustment reducer of the property given in exchange by the
  taxpayer of the regular regime, less the value of the equalization payment, and the value of the adjustment reducer may not be negative. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

        § 6º The provisions of item I of § 2º and § 5º of this article also apply to settled purchase and sale operations for real property followed by acknowledgment of debt and
  promise of conveyance in lieu of payment of a constructed or to-be-constructed real estate unit, provided that the disposal of the property and the commitment to convey in payment
  are carried out on the same date, by public instrument.
         § 7º The provisions of § 4º of art. 57 of this Complementary Law apply to the operations of disposal, lease, onerous assignment and letting of real property owned
  by a natural person subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS that are not related to the development of their economic activity.

        § 8º The provisions of § 6º of this article do not apply if the quantity and value of the operations with the properties referred to therein characterize economic
  activity of the taxpayer, under the terms of §§ 1º and 2º of art. 251.

       § 8º The provisions of § 7º of this article do not apply if the quantity and value of the operations with the properties referred to therein characterize economic
  activity of the taxpayer, under the terms of §§ 1º and 2º of art. 251. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 9º In the disposal of properties that have been the subject of a guarantee constituted in favor of a creditor subject to the specific regime of this Chapter, whose ownership
  has been consolidated by or transferred to them in payment or amortization of the debt, the provisions of art. 200 of this Complementary Law must be observed.

         Art. 253. The lease, onerous assignment or letting of residential real property by a taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, for a period not
  exceeding 90 (ninety) uninterrupted days, shall be taxed in accordance with the same rules applicable to hotel services, provided for in Section II of Chapter
  VII of Title V of this Book.

         § 1º For purposes of the caput of this article, natural persons who meet the provisions of item I of § 1º and item II of § 2º, both of
  art. 251 of this Complementary Law, are considered taxpayers subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 2º The operations referred to in this article shall be included in the limits referred to in item I of § 1º and item II of § 2º, both of art. 251 of this
  Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                      Section II

                                                                  Of the Moment of Occurrence of the Taxable Event

        Art. 254. The taxable event of the IBS and the CBS is considered to occur:

        I - in the disposal of real property, at the moment of the act of disposal;

         II - in the assignment or in the onerous transfer or constitutive act of real rights over real property, at the moment the act is executed, including any
  subsequent adjustments, except those relating to security;

        III - in the lease, onerous assignment or letting of real property, at the moment of payment;

        IV - in the administration and intermediation service for real property, at the moment of payment; and

        V - in civil construction services, at the moment of supply.

         § 1º For purposes of item I of the caput of this article, disposal means adjudication, execution, including any subsequent adjustments, of the
  disposal contract, even by means of a promise instrument, reservation letter with a beginning of payment, or any other document representing a
  commitment, or when the suspensive condition to which the disposal is subject is fulfilled.

        § 2º In the cases referred to in items III and IV of the caput of this article, the IBS and the CBS levied on the operation shall be due upon each payment.

                                                                                      Section III

                                                                                Of the Tax Base

                                                                                     Subsection I

                                                                                General Provisions

        Art. 255. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS is the value:

        I - of the transaction for the disposal of the real property;

        II - of the lease, onerous assignment or rental of the real property;

        III - of the assignment or the onerous act transferring or constituting real rights over real property;

        IV - of the administration or intermediation transaction;

        V - of the transaction in civil construction services.

        § 1º The value of the transaction referred to in the caput of this article includes:

        I - the value of interest and monetary variations, based on the exchange rate or on an index or coefficient applicable under legal or contractual provision;

         II - monetary restatement, in sales contracted with a clause for monetary restatement of the price's outstanding balance, that come to form part of the values
  actually received from the disposal of real property;

        III - the values referred to in items I to III and VI of § 1º of art. 12 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The following shall not be included in the value of the lease, onerous assignment or rental of real property:

        I - the value of taxes and fees levied on the real property; and

        II - condominium expenses.

        § 3º In real property intermediation services, in the event that the act or transaction relating to real property is concluded through the intermediation of more than one broker,
  natural or legal person, the tax base for the levy of the IBS and the CBS shall be considered to be the portion of the remuneration agreed with each broker for the
  intermediation, excluding:

        I - the amounts paid directly by the parties contracting the intermediation; and

        II - the amounts passed on between real estate brokers.

        § 4º In the case referred to in § 3º of this article, each broker is liable for the IBS and the CBS levied on its respective portion of the remuneration.

        § 5º In the case of the rendering of civil construction services to a non-taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime in which construction
  materials are supplied, the service provider may only appropriate the IBS and CBS credit relating to the acquisition of the construction materials up to the value of the debit relating to
  the rendering of the civil construction service.



         § 6º The provision of § 5º of this article does not apply to the rendering of civil construction services to the direct public administration, agencies and public
  foundations.

        Art. 256. The tax administrations may determine the reference value of the real property, in the manner set out in regulations, by means of a specific methodology to
  estimate the market value of real property, which shall take into account:

         I - analysis of prices practiced in the real estate market;

         II - information sent by the tax administrations of the Municipalities, the Federal District, the States and the Union;

         III - information provided by registry and notarial services; and

         IV - location, typology, use and date, standard and construction area, among other characteristics of the real property.

       § 1º The reference value may be used as a means of proof in cases of arbitration of the transaction value under the terms of art. 13, together with the
  other characteristics of the transaction.

         § 2º The reference value of real property shall be:

         I - disclosed and made available in the National System for the Management of Territorial Information (Sinter);

         II - estimated for all real property comprising the CIB referred to in item III of § 1º of art. 59 of this Complementary Law; and

         III - updated annually.

         § 3º The reference value may be challenged by means of a specific procedure, under the terms of the regulations.

       § 4º For purposes of determining the reference value, the registry and notarial services must share the information on real property transactions
  with the tax administrations through the Sinter.

                                                                                    Subsection II

                                                                                Of the Adjustment Reducer

        Art. 257. As of January 1, 2027, there shall be linked to each real property owned by a taxpayer subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime a value
  corresponding to the respective adjustment reducer, under the terms of the regulations.

         § 1º The adjustment reducer referred to in this article shall be used exclusively to reduce the tax base of transactions for the disposal of real property
  carried out by a taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime.

         § 2º The value of the adjustment reducer is composed of:

         I - its initial value, under the terms of the caput of art. 258; and

         II - the values set out in § 6º of art. 258.

         § 3º The values referred to in items I and II of § 2º of this article shall be adjusted by the IPCA or by another index that may replace it, from the date of its
  constitution until the date on which the IBS and the CBS levied on the disposal of the real property become due.

         § 4º In the disposal of real property, the adjustment reducer:

         I - shall be maintained at the same value and with the same restatement criterion, in the case where the real property is acquired by a taxpayer subject to the IBS and
  CBS regular regime;

         II - shall be extinguished in other cases.

        § 5º In the merger, consolidation or unification of real property, the value of the adjustment reducer of the real property resulting from the merger, consolidation or unification
  shall correspond to the sum of the value of the adjustment reducer of the merged or unified real properties.

         § 6º In the division of real property, including by subdivision, dismemberment and parceling, the value of the adjustment reducer of the real properties resulting from the
  division must be equal to the value of the adjustment reducer of the divided real property, observing the following criteria:

         I - the value of the adjustment reducer shall be allocated to each real property resulting from the division in proportion to its market value; or

        II - where it is not possible to identify the market value of each real property resulting from the division, or in other cases provided for in regulations, the value
  of the adjustment reducer shall be allocated to each real property resulting from the division in proportion to its area.

       § 7º In land subdivision (loteamento) activity carried out by means of a partnership agreement, the adjustment reducer shall be applied proportionally to the transaction of each partner,
  based on the percentages set out in the partnership agreement.

       § 8º The absence of regulations on the manner of use of the adjustment reducer referred to in this article does not prevent its use under the terms of this Complementary
  Law.

         Art. 258. The initial value of the adjustment reducer corresponds to:

         I - in the case of real property owned by the taxpayer on December 31, 2026:

         a) the acquisition value of the real property adjusted under the terms of § 4º of this article; or

         b) at the taxpayer's option, the reference value referred to in art. 256 of this Complementary Law;

         II - in the case of real property under construction on December 31, 2026, the sum of:

         a) the acquisition value of the land, as stated in the instruments referred to in the manner of § 1º of art. 254, adjusted under the terms of § 4º of this article; and

         a) the acquisition value of the real property on which the construction is being carried out, as stated in the instruments referred to in the manner of § 1º of art. 254,
  adjusted under the terms of § 4º of this article; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) the value of the goods and services that may be recorded as production cost of the real property or as a direct expense related to the production or
  commercialization of the real property acquired prior to January 1, 2027, evidenced on the basis of valid tax documents, adjusted under the terms of §
  4º of this article;

         III - in the case of real property acquired as of January 1, 2027, the acquisition value of the real property.



       III - in the case of real property acquired from a non-taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime as of January 1, 2027, the acquisition value of the
  real property. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1º The date of constitution of the adjustment reducer is:

        I - in the case of items I and II of the caput of this article, December 31, 2026;

        II - in the case of item III of the caput of this article, the date of the transaction.

         § 2º If the reference value of the real property is not available on December 31, 2026, the taxpayer who does not opt for fixing the adjustment reducer in the
  manner of item I of the caput of this article may calculate it based on an estimate of the market value of the real property made by means of a specific procedure,
  under the terms of the regulations.

        § 3º If the acquisition value referred to in items I, item "a", II, item "a", and III of the caput of this article is based on declarations or documents that
  are not consistent with the market value or that do not merit credence, the tax authority may institute administrative proceedings, observing the right to challenge and
  full defense, to determine the actual acquisition value, under the terms of the regulations.

        § 4º The values referred to in items I, item "a", and II, items "a" and "b", of the caput of this article shall be adjusted until December 31, 2026 by the IPCA
  or by another index that may replace it.

         § 5º In the case referred to in item III of the caput, the value of the adjustment reducer is limited to the acquisition value of the real property by the transferor, adjusted by the IPCA or by
  another index that may replace it, in the event that:

        I - the disposal occurs within a period of less than 3 (three) years, counted from the date of acquisition of the real property;

        II - the real property was acquired from a taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime; and

        III - payment is not evidenced, by the transferor, of:

        a) the Income Tax on capital gains in relation to the transaction; and

        b) the Real Property Transfer Tax, in relation to the acquisition by the transferor.

        § 6º The following are included in the adjustment reducer relating to the real property, as of the date of actual payment:

        I - the value of the Real Property Transfer Tax (ITBI) and of the laudêmio levied on the acquisition of the real property to which the adjustment reducer refers; and

         II - urban planning and environmental consideration payments made or delivered to public entities as a result of federal, state or municipal
  legislation, including, but not limited to, amounts spent as onerous grant of the right to build, onerous grant for change of use, and any
  other considerations owed to public bodies for the execution of the real estate development, provided that they have not been included in the initial value of the adjustment
  reducer referred to in the caput.

        § 7º The following are included in the concept of municipal considerations:

         I - the value corresponding to the percentage allocated for the donation of public areas under the terms of art. 22 of Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979, recorded
  in the subdivision registration and its real property record, applied to the value of the transactions, provided that the respective value has not already been considered in the adjustment
  reducer; and

         II - the considerations established in the development approval act recorded in the real property registry office, under the terms of item V of the caput of
  art. 18 of Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979.

        § 8º The appropriation of credits in relation to the IBS and the CBS levied on the goods and services acquired for carrying out the considerations
  referred to in item II of § 6º of this article that form part of the adjustment reducer is prohibited, under the terms of the said paragraph.

         § 9º The date of constitution of the values included in the adjustment reducer under the terms of § 6º of this article is the date of payment of the taxes and considerations
  or of the transfer to the government of the assets ceded as consideration.

        § 10. In the case of real property acquired from a taxpayer subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime as of January 1, 2027, the maintenance of the value of the adjustment reducer is assured, under the terms of item I of § 4º of art. 257, without prejudice to the right to the IBS and CBS credit levied on the
  transaction. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                   Subsection III

                                                                                Of the Social Reducer

         Art. 259. In the disposal of new residential real property or of a residential lot carried out by a taxpayer subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime, a social reducer of
  R$ 100,000.00 (one hundred thousand reais) per new residential real property and of R$ 30,000.00 (thirty thousand
  reais) per residential lot may be deducted from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS, up to the limit of the tax base value, after deduction of the adjustment reducer.

        § 1º The following are considered:

         I - residential real property: the unit built in an urban or rural zone for residential purposes, in accordance with the building regulations of the
  locality in which it is situated and occupied by a person as a place of residence;

       II - residential lot: the real estate unit resulting from urban land subdivision under the terms of Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979, or subject to a
  condominium of lots, under the terms of art. 1,358-A of Law No. 10,406, of January 10, 2002 (Civil Code); and

        III - new real property: one that has not been occupied or used, under the terms of the regulations.

        § 2º For each real property, the social reducer referred to in this article may be used only once.

         § 3º The value of the social reducer provided for in the caput of this article shall be adjusted monthly as of the publication of this Complementary Law by the IPCA or by another
  index that may replace it.

         § 4º When the land subdivision (loteamento) activity is carried out by means of a partnership agreement, the social reducer shall be applied proportionally to the transaction of each
  partner, based on the percentages set out in the partnership agreement.

        Art. 260. In the transaction of lease, onerous assignment or rental of real property for residential use carried out by a taxpayer subject to the
  IBS and CBS regular regime, a social reducer of R$ 600.00 (six hundred reais) per real property may be deducted from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS, up to the limit of the value
  of the tax base.

         Art. 260. In the transaction of lease, onerous assignment or rental of real property for residential use carried out by a taxpayer subject to the IBS and CBS
  regular regime, a social reducer of R$ 600.00 (six hundred reais), per month, per real property, may be deducted from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS, up to
  the limit of the value of the tax base. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


         Sole paragraph. The value of the social reducer provided for in the caput of this article shall be adjusted monthly as of the date of publication of this Complementary Law
  by the IPCA or by another index that may replace it.

                                                                                     Section IV

                                                                                    Of the Rate

        Art. 261. The rates of the IBS and the CBS relating to the transactions referred to in this Chapter are reduced by 50% (fifty percent).

         Sole paragraph. The rates of the IBS and the CBS relating to transactions of lease, onerous assignment and rental of real property are reduced by 70%
  (seventy percent).

                                                                                     Section V

                                                            Of Real Estate Development and Land Subdivision

       Art. 262. In real estate development and land subdivision, the IBS and the CBS levied on the disposal of the real estate units shall be due upon each
  payment.

        § 1º The following is considered a real estate unit:

        I - land acquired for sale, with or without construction;

        II - each lot arising from the dismemberment of land;

        III - each plot of land arising from a subdivision;

        IV - each distinct unit resulting from a real estate development; and

        V - the building constructed for sale as an isolated or autonomous unit.

        § 2º Of the amounts of IBS and CBS due in each assessment period, the transferor may offset the appropriated credits relating to the IBS and the CBS
  paid on the acquisition of goods and services.

        § 3º Any credit balance may be the subject of:

         I - a request for reimbursement, provided that the reimbursement is made directly into a current account linked to the segregated estate (patrimônio de afetação), in the manner of
  arts. 31-A to 31-E of Law No. 4,591, of December 16, 1964, and arts. 18-A to 18-E of Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979, until the completion,
  respectively, of the development or of the land subdivision; or

        II - a request for reimbursement or offsetting against the amounts of the IBS and the CBS relating to other taxed transactions of the taxpayer, after the completion of the
  development or of the land subdivision.

        § 4º In the disposal of real property referred to in this article, the adjustment reducer referred to in art. 258 and, where applicable, the social reducer referred to in art. 259 of this
  Complementary Law shall be deducted from the tax base relating to each installment, proportionally to the total value of the real property.

        § 5º In the case of residential lots and new residential real property whose payment began before January 1, 2027, the application of the reducers
  referred to in § 4º of this article shall occur proportionally to the total value of the real property, including installments paid before that date.

                                                                                     Section VI

                                                                                Of Tax Liability

        Art. 263. The following are taxpayers of the transactions referred to in this Chapter:

        I - the transferor of real property, in the disposal of real property or of a right related thereto;

        II - whoever assigns, institutes or transfers real rights over real property, in the assignment or in the onerous act instituting or transferring real rights over real
  property, except security interests;

        III - the lessor, the assignor or the landlord, in the lease, onerous assignment or rental of real property;

        IV - the acquirer, in the case of adjudication, redemption and acquisition at judicial auction of real property;

        V - the provider of construction services;

        VI - the provider of real property administration and intermediation services.

        § 1º In the case of item IV of the caput of this article, the transaction:

        I - shall be taxed as a disposal carried out by a taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime, if there is an adjustment reducer linked to the real property, applying the
  provision of art. 257, § 1º; or

        II - shall be treated as a disposal carried out by a non-taxpayer of the IBS and CBS regular regime, if there is no adjustment reducer linked to the real property.

         § 2º In the case of co-ownership of real property subject to undivided co-ownership (condomínio pro indiviso), the co-owners may, under the terms of the regulations,
  opt for the unified collection of the IBS and the CBS under a single CNPJ.

         § 3º In the case of co-ownership, the IBS and the CBS shall be levied proportionally on the portion of the real property relating to the co-owner who qualifies as a
  taxpayer, under the terms of the caput and of § 1º of art. 251 of this Complementary Law.

       Art. 264. In sociedades em conta de participação (silent partnerships), the ostensible partner is required to make the payment of the IBS and the CBS levied on
  transactions with real property, the exclusion of amounts owed to participating partners being prohibited.

                                                                                     Section VII

                                                                                Final Provisions

        Art. 265. The urban and rural real property referred to in this Section must be registered in the CIB, part of the Sinter, referred to in item III of § 1º of art. 59
  of this Complementary Law.

         § 1º The CIB is the inventory of urban and rural real property constituted with data sent by the source registries, which must meet the criteria for
  assignment of the CIB registration code.

        § 2º The CIB must mandatorily appear on all documents relating to civil construction works issued by the Municipality.
        Art. 266. The following deadlines are established for the registration of all real property in the CIB:      Effective as of

        I - 12 (twelve) months for:

        a) the direct and indirect federal administration bodies to adapt their systems for the adoption of the CIB as the cadastral identification code for
  urban and rural real property;

        b) the notarial and registry services to adapt their systems for the adoption of the CIB as the cadastral identification code for real property;

        c) the state capitals and the Federal District to include the CIB code in their systems;

        II - 24 (twenty-four) months for:

        a) the direct and indirect state administration bodies to adapt their systems for the adoption of the CIB as the cadastral identification code for
  urban and rural real property;

        b) the other Municipalities to include the CIB code in their systems.

        Art. 267. A negative certificate of debts shall be issued for urban and rural real property, under the terms of the regulations.

         Art. 268. The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may establish, by joint act, ancillary obligations in the interest of tax enforcement and administration,
  for third parties related to the transactions referred to in this Chapter, including notaries, real property registrars and boards of trade.

        Art. 269. The civil construction work shall receive a cadastral identification in the registry referred to in art. 265 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 270. The assessment of the IBS and the CBS shall be made for each civil construction development, linked to a specific CNPJ or CPF, including
  real estate development and land subdivision, each civil construction work, development or land subdivision being considered as a distinct cost center.

         Sole paragraph. In the case of assessment of the IBS and the CBS under the terms of the caput of this article, the tax document must indicate the registration number of the work
  on the acquisitions of goods and services used in the civil construction work for which they are intended.

                                                                                   CHAPTER VI

                                                                     OF COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES

         Art. 271. Cooperative societies may opt for a specific IBS and CBS regime under which the rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on the transaction are reduced to zero, in which:

        I - the member supplies a good or service to the cooperative it participates in; and

        II - the cooperative supplies a good or service to a member subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime.

        § 1º The provision of the caput of this article also applies to:

        I - transactions carried out between singular, central cooperatives, federations, confederations and those originating from their respective cooperative banks that
  the cooperatives participate in; and

        II - the transaction of supplying a material good by an agricultural production cooperative to a member not subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime, provided
  that the credits it appropriated relating to the good supplied are cancelled.

        § 2º The provision of item II of the caput of this article also applies to the supply, by cooperatives, of financial services to their members, including
  those charged by way of fees and commissions.

        § 3º The option referred to in the caput of this article shall be exercised by the cooperative in the calendar year prior to that in which effects begin to be produced or at the beginning of
  its operations, under the terms of the regulations.

         § 4º The provision of item II of § 1º does not apply to transactions with agricultural and aquaculture inputs covered by the deferral established by § 3º
  of art. 138.

        Art. 272. The member subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime, including singular cooperatives, that carries out transactions with the rate reduction referred to in item I of the caput of art. 271 may transfer the credits from prior-stage transactions to the transactions in which it supplies goods and services and the presumed
  credits to the cooperative it participates in, the provision of art. 55 of this Complementary Law not applying.

        Sole paragraph. The transfer of credits referred to in the caput of this article covers only the goods and services used for the production of the good or the rendering
  of the service supplied by the member to the cooperative it participates in, under the terms of the regulations.

                                                                                   CHAPTER VII

           OF BARS, RESTAURANTS, HOTEL SERVICES, AMUSEMENT PARKS AND THEME PARKS, COLLECTIVE PASSENGER TRANSPORT AND
                                                        TOURISM AGENCIES

                                                                                     Section I

                                                                          Of Bars and Restaurants

        Art. 273. Transactions for the supply of food by bars and restaurants, including snack bars (lanchonetes), are subject to a specific regime for the levy of the IBS
  and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

        § 1º The specific regime referred to in this Section also applies to the supply of non-alcoholic beverages prepared on the premises.

        § 2º The following supplies are not subject to the specific regime referred to in this Section:

        I - food for a legal entity, under contract, classified under NBS codes 1.0301.31.00, 1.0301.32.00 and 1.0301.39.00 or by a company classified under
  code 5620-1/01 of the National Classification of Economic Activities (CNAE);

        II - food products and non-alcoholic beverages acquired from third parties, not subjected to preparation on the premises; and

        III - alcoholic beverages, even if prepared on the premises.

       Art. 274. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS is the value of the transaction for the supply of food and of the beverages referred to in § 1º of art. 273 of this
  Complementary Law.

        Sole paragraph. The following are excluded from the tax base:

        I - the tip (gorjeta) levied on the supply of food, provided that:
        a) it is passed on in full to the employee, without prejudice to the amounts of the tip that are withheld by the employer pursuant to a legal determination; and

        b) its value does not exceed 15% (fifteen percent) of the total value of the food and beverages supplied;

        II - the amounts not passed on to bars and restaurants by the delivery and food and beverage order intermediation service via digital platform.

        Art. 275. The rates of the IBS and the CBS relating to the transactions referred to in this Chapter are reduced by 40% (forty percent).

        Art. 276. The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by acquirers of food and beverages supplied by bars and restaurants, including
  snack bars, is prohibited.

                                                                                      Section II

                                                              Of Hotel Services, Amusement Parks and Theme Parks

        Art. 277. Hotel services, amusement parks and theme parks are subject to a specific regime for the levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the
  provisions of this Section.

         Art. 278. For purposes of this Complementary Law, hotel service is considered to be the supply of temporary lodging, as well as of other
  services included in the value charged for the lodging, in:

        I - units for the exclusive use of guests, in an establishment intended for that purpose; or

        II - furnished residential real property, even if not for the exclusive use of guests.

         Sole paragraph. The supply of hotel services is not disqualified by the division of the development into hotel units, understood as the
  attribution of autonomous legal status to the residential units comprising it, under the ownership of various persons, provided that their functional purpose is
  exclusively for lodging.

        Art. 279. For purposes of this Complementary Law, the following are considered:

         I - amusement park: the permanent or itinerant establishment or development whose essential activity is to make available attractions intended to
  entertain people and enjoyed in person at the location where they are made available; and

        II - theme park: the amusement park inspired by a historical, cultural, ethnographic, recreational or environmental theme.

        Art. 280. The tax base of the IBS and the CBS is the value of the transaction with hotel services, amusement parks and theme parks.

        Sole paragraph. Transactions for the supply of food and beverages by establishments that render the services referred to in this Section shall
  observe the rules relating to the specific regime for bars and restaurants. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 281. The rates of the IBS and the CBS relating to the transactions referred to in this Chapter are reduced by 40% (forty percent).

         Art. 282. The appropriation and use of IBS and CBS credits on acquisitions of goods and services by suppliers of hotel services, amusement parks and theme parks are permitted, observing the provision of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 283. The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the acquirer of hotel services, amusement parks and theme parks is prohibited.

                                                                                      Section III

        Of Intermunicipal and Interstate Road, Rail, Waterway and Regional Air Collective Passenger Transport and Of Regional Air Cargo
                                                                     Transport

         Art. 284. The following collective passenger transport services are subject to a specific regime for the levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the
  provisions of this Section:

        I - intermunicipal and interstate road transport;

        II - intermunicipal and interstate rail and waterway transport;

        III - urban, semi-urban and metropolitan rail and waterway transport; and

        IV - regional air transport.

        § 1º For purposes of this Complementary Law, the following are considered:

        I - collective passenger transport: the service of moving people that is accessible to the entire population by means of individualized charging;

        II - intermunicipal passenger transport: the service of moving people between Municipalities located within the same State or the Federal District;

        III - interstate passenger transport: the service of moving people between Municipalities of different States or of a State and the Federal District;

        IV - road passenger transport: that defined in accordance with the provision of item II of the sole paragraph of art. 157 of this Complementary Law;

        V - rail passenger transport: the service of moving people carried out by means of the locomotion of trains or convoys on rails;

        VI - waterway passenger transport: the service of moving people carried out by means of routes for water traffic;

       VII - urban, semi-urban and metropolitan transport: that defined in accordance with the provision of items IV to VI of the sole paragraph of art. 157 of this
  Complementary Law, with routes and fares set by the government; and

        VIII - regional air transport: domestic aviation with flights originating in or destined for the Legal Amazon or for regional capitals, sub-regional
  centers, zone centers or local centers, as defined by the IBGE, and in the manner regulated by the Ministry of Ports and Airports.

        § 2º The appropriation and use of IBS and CBS credits by the acquirers of transport services are permitted, observing the provision of arts.
  47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

          § 3º The routes referred to in item VIII of § 1º shall be defined by joint act of the General Committee of the IBS and the Minister of State for Finance, based on
  classification by the National Civil Aviation Agency (ANAC), the exclusion of routes within a period of less than 2 (two) years from their inclusion being prohibited.

        § 4º The specific regime referred to in items I to III of the caput applies only to public collective passenger transport, understood as that
  operated under a regime of public authorization, permission or concession.

        Art. 285. In relation to public collective passenger transport services by rail and waterway of an urban, semi-urban and metropolitan nature:


        I - the rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on the supply of these services are reduced by 100% (one hundred percent);

        II - the appropriation of IBS and CBS credits on acquisitions by the transport service supplier is prohibited; and

        III - the appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the acquirer of the transport services is prohibited.

        Art. 286. In relation to intermunicipal and interstate collective passenger transport services by road, rail and waterway, the rates of the IBS
  and the CBS of the specific regime referred to in this Section are reduced by 40% (forty percent).

         Sole paragraph. The appropriation and use of IBS and CBS credits on acquisitions of goods and services by suppliers of the transport
  services referred to in this article subject to the IBS and CBS regular regime are permitted, observing the provision of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 287. The rates of the IBS and the CBS levied on the supply of regional air collective passenger or cargo transport services are reduced by 40% (forty percent).

                                                                                        Section IV

                                                                              Of Tourism Agencies

        Art. 288. Tourism agency services are subject to a specific regime for the levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

        Art. 289. In the intermediation of tourism services carried out by tourism agencies:

       I - the tax base of the IBS and the CBS is the value of the transaction, less the amounts passed on to the suppliers intermediated by the agency based on the
  document that substantiates the agency transaction; and

        II - the rate is the same one applicable to hotel services, amusement parks and theme parks.

        § 1º The value of the transaction referred to in item I of the caput of this article comprises the total value charged to the user of the agency's service, including all
  the goods and services provided and enjoyed with the intermediation of the agency, added to its margin and other charges collected from the user.

        § 2º The other amounts, commissions and incentives paid by third parties, as a result of the agency's activity, also form part of the tax base and are subject to the provisions of this article.

        Art. 290. The appropriation, by the acquirer, of IBS and CBS credits relating to the intermediation service rendered by the tourism agency is permitted,
  observing the provision of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 291. The appropriation and use of IBS and CBS credits on acquisitions of goods and services by tourism agencies are permitted, the
  crediting of amounts that are deducted from the tax base, under the terms of item I of the caput of art. 289 of this Complementary Law, being prohibited, observing the provision of arts. 47 to
  56 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                     CHAPTER VIII

                                                                   OF THE FOOTBALL CORPORATION - SAF

        Art. 292. Transactions with goods and services carried out by a Sociedade Anônima do Futebol - SAF (Football Corporation) are subject to a specific IBS and CBS regime, in
  accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

         Sole paragraph. An SAF is considered to be the company whose principal activity consists of the practice of football, women's and men's, in professional
  competition, subject to the rules provided for in specific legislation.

        Art. 293. The SAF is subject to the Specific Football Taxation Regime - TEF established in this Chapter.

        § 1º The TEF consists of the monthly payment of the following taxes and contributions, to be assessed following the cash basis:

        I - Corporate Income Tax - IRPJ;

        II - Social Contribution on Net Income - CSLL;

        III - contributions provided for in items I, II and III of the caput and in § 6º of art. 22 of Law No. 8,212, of July 24, 1991;

        IV - CBS; and

        V - IBS.

         § 2º Payment in the manner of this Chapter does not exclude the levy of other federal, state, district or municipal taxes, owed in the capacity of
  taxpayer or party liable, in relation to which the legislation applicable to other legal entities shall be observed.

        § 3º The tax base for the unified monthly payment of the taxes referred to in § 1º of this article shall be the total revenue received in the month, including
  that relating to:

        I - prizes and fan-membership (sócio-torcedor) programs;

        II - assignment of athletes' sporting rights;

        III - assignment of image rights; and

        IV - transfer of the athlete to another sporting entity or their return to activity at another sporting entity.

        § 4º The value of the unified monthly payment of the taxes referred to in § 1º of this article shall be calculated by applying the following rates:

        I - 4% (four percent) for the unified federal taxes referred to in items I to III of § 1º of this article;

        II - 1.5% (one and five-tenths percent) for the CBS; and

        II - 1% (one percent) for the CBS; and       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - 3% (three percent) for the IBS, of which:

        III - 1% (one percent) for the IBS, of which:       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) half of that percentage corresponds to the state rate; and

        b) half of that percentage corresponds to the municipal rate.


        § 5º The SAF may only appropriate and use IBS and CBS credits in relation to transactions in which it is the acquirer of athletes' sporting rights,
  at the same rate owed on those transactions, observing, as applicable, the provision of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         § 6º The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by acquirers of goods and services from the SAF is prohibited, with the exception of the acquisition of athletes' sporting rights,
  at the same rate owed on those transactions, observing, as applicable, the provision of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         § 7º For purposes of the apportionment of tax revenue, the amount collected in the manner of the unified monthly payment referred to in § 4º of this article shall be allocated to the
  taxes specified below, by applying the following percentages to the amount collected:

        I - 43.5% (forty-three and five-tenths percent) to the IRPJ;

        II - 18.6% (eighteen and six-tenths percent) to the CSLL; and

         III - 37.9% (thirty-seven and nine-tenths percent) to the contributions provided for in items I, II and III of the caput and in § 6º of art. 22 of Law No. 8,212, of July
  24, 1991, distributed as governed by an act of the Minister of State for Finance.

        § 8º A joint act of the RFB and the IBS Management Committee shall regulate the manner of payment of the IBS and the CBS owed under this Chapter.

        § 9º (VETOED).         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 10. (VETOED).         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 294. From January 1, 2027 to December 31, 2032, the rates of the taxes comprising the TEF shall be:

        I - as to the federal taxes referred to in items I to III of § 1º of art. 293, the rate defined in item I of § 4º of art. 293 of this Complementary Law;

        II - as to the CBS, the rate defined in item II of § 4º of art. 293 of this Complementary Law, which shall be reduced by 0.1% (one-tenth percent) for the
  calendar years 2027 and 2028; and

        III - as to the IBS:

        a) 0.1% (one-tenth percent) in 2027 and 2028;

        b) 0.3% (three-tenths percent) in 2029;

        c) 0.6% (six-tenths percent) in 2030;

        d) 0.9% (nine-tenths percent) in 2031;

        e) 1.2% (one and two-tenths percent) in 2032; and

        f) the full rate percentage, from 2033 onward.

         Sole paragraph. The provision of items "a" and "b" of item III of § 4º and of § 7º of art. 293 of this Complementary Law applies to the apportionment of the
  tax revenue of the taxes referred to in the caput of this article during the transition period.

        Art. 295. The importation of athletes' sporting rights is subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS at the same rates applicable to transactions carried out
  in the Country, applying the rules for the importation of intangible goods, including rights, and of services provided for in Section II of Chapter IV of Title I of this Book.

         Art. 296. The assignment of athletes' sporting rights to a resident or domiciliary abroad for the carrying out of sporting activities predominantly
  abroad shall be considered an export for purposes of the IBS and CBS immunity, the percentages referred to in items II and III of § 4º of art. 293 of this
  Complementary Law being excluded from the rate applicable for calculation of the unified payment referred to in the said article.

                                                                                     CHAPTER IX

                      OF DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS, CONSULAR OFFICES AND TRANSACTIONS COVERED BY INTERNATIONAL TREATY

        Art. 297. Transactions with goods and services covered by a treaty or international convention entered into by the Union and endorsed by the National
  Congress, under the terms of item VIII of art. 84 of the Federal Constitution, including those relating to diplomatic missions, consular offices, representations of
  international organizations and their respective accredited officials, are subject to a specific regime for the levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of this
  Chapter.

         Art. 298. Amounts of IBS and CBS paid in transactions with goods or services intended for diplomatic missions and consular offices of a
  permanent nature and their respective accredited officials may be reimbursed, under the terms of the regulations, upon approval by the Ministry of Foreign
  Affairs after verification of the tax regime applied to Brazilian diplomatic representations and their respective officials in that country.

        Art. 299. The application of the rules relating to the IBS and the CBS provided for in an internalized treaty or international convention, including those
  relating to international organizations of which Brazil is a member and their respective accredited officials, and those in force on the date of publication of this Complementary Law, shall be
  regulated by joint act of the Minister of State for Finance and the IBS Management Committee, after consulting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

                                                                                     CHAPTER X

                                                              COMMON PROVISIONS FOR THE SPECIFIC REGIMES

        Art. 300. The assessment period of the IBS and the CBS in the specific regimes for financial services, health care plans and prognostic contests
  referred to in Chapters II, III and IV of this Title shall be monthly.

        Art. 301. If the tax base of the IBS and the CBS in the specific regimes for financial services, health care plans and prognostic contests
  referred to in Chapters II, III and IV of this Title is negative in the assessment period, the taxpayer may deduct the negative value from the tax base, without
  any restatement, from the positive tax bases of subsequent assessment periods.

        Sole paragraph. The deduction referred to in the caput may be made within a period of up to 5 (five) years counted from the last business day of the assessment period.

        Art. 302. Taxpayers subject to the specific regimes for financial services, health care plans, prognostic contests and real property referred to in Chapters II, III, IV and V of this Title may appropriate and use the IBS and CBS credit on their acquisitions of goods and services, observing the
  provision of arts. 47 to 56, except where there is a specific rule in a specific regime applicable to the goods and services acquired.

         Sole paragraph. The assessment of the IBS and CBS in the specific regimes referred to in the caput does not entail reversal, partial or full, of the credits relating to
  acquisitions of goods and services.

        Art. 303. The appropriation of IBS and CBS credit on amounts that are deducted from the tax base of the IBS and the CBS in the specific
  regimes, as well as the duplicate deduction of any amount, is prohibited.

        Art. 304. The general rules on the levy of the IBS and the CBS referred to in Title I of this Book apply to transactions, imports and exports with
  goods and services carried out by suppliers subject to specific regimes and that are not the subject of one of those specific regimes.
         Art. 305. The ancillary obligations to be complied with by legal entities subject to specific regimes shall be uniform throughout the national territory and
  may be different from those applicable to the operationalization of the IBS and the CBS on transactions, provided for in the general levy rules referred to in Chapter III
  of Title I of this Book, including in relation to their periodicity, and shall be set by the regulations.

        § 1º The ancillary obligations referred to in the caput must contain the information necessary for the assessment of the tax base, crediting and distribution
  of the proceeds from the collection of the IBS, in addition to the other information required in each specific regime.

        § 2º The data to be reported in the ancillary obligations referred to in the caput may be aggregated by municipality, under the terms of the regulations.

       § 3º The information provided by the taxable person under the terms of this article has a declaratory character, constituting a confession of the amount owed of IBS and
  CBS set out in the ancillary obligation.

         § 4º The regulations shall provide for cases in which compliance with the ancillary obligation referred to in this article shall exempt the issuance of the electronic tax
  document referred to in art. 60 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 306. In the case of financial services and health care plans acquired by the Union, States, the Federal District and Municipalities, the
  same rules provided for in art. 473 of this Complementary Law for other acquisitions of goods and services by the direct public administration, by agencies and by
  public foundations shall apply.

        Art. 307. The general rules on the levy of the IBS and the CBS, in accordance with the provisions of Title I of this Book, apply as to rules not
  expressly provided for the specific regimes in this Title.

                                                                                    TITLE VI

                                                                     OF THE DIFFERENTIATED CBS REGIMES

                                                                                    CHAPTER I

                                                            OF THE UNIVERSITY FOR ALL PROGRAM - PROUNI

        Art. 308. The rate of the CBS levied on the supply of higher education services by a private educational institution, with or without a profit motive,
  is reduced to zero during the period of adherence and participation in the University for All Program - Prouni, established by Law No. 11,096, of January 13,
  2005.

        § 1º The rate reduction referred to in the caput shall be applied:

        I - to revenue arising from the carrying out of higher education activities, arising from undergraduate courses or specific-training sequential
  courses; and

        II - in proportion to the effective occupation of the scholarships owed within the scope of the Prouni, under the terms defined in an act of the Executive Branch of the Union.

        § 2º If the institution is disaffiliated from the Prouni, the CBS shall be required as of the initial term established for requiring the other federal taxes
  covered by the Prouni.

                                                                                    CHAPTER II

                                                                             OF THE AUTOMOTIVE REGIME

        Art. 309. Until December 31, 2032, presumed CBS credit shall be available, under the terms of this Complementary Law, to projects qualified for the benefits
  established by art. 11-C of Law No. 9,440, of March 14, 1997, and by arts. 1º to 4º of Law No. 9,826, of August 23, 1999. Effective as of

        § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput:

         I - shall exclusively incentivize the production of vehicles equipped with an electric motor capable of propelling the vehicle solely with electric power,
  combination with an internal combustion engine that uses biofuels being permitted, alone or simultaneously with petroleum-derived fuels; and

        II - shall be granted exclusively to:

        a) projects approved by December 31, 2024, of legal entities that, on December 20, 2023, were qualified for the benefits
  established by art. 11-C of Law No. 9,440, of March 14, 1997, and by arts. 1º to 4º of Law No. 9,826, of August 23, 1999; and

          b) new projects, approved by December 31, 2025, that expand or restart production at an industrial plant used in active or inactive projects
  qualified for the benefits referred to in item "a" of this item.

         § 2º The benefit referred to in this article shall be extended to projects of legal entities referred to in item "a" of item II of § 1º related to the production of
  vehicles propelled by an internal combustion engine that use biofuels, alone or cumulatively with petroleum-derived fuels, provided that the
  qualified legal entity:

        I - begins production of the vehicles referred to in item I of § 1º by January 1, 2028, at the incentivized establishment; and

        II - assumes, under the terms of the benefit's granting act, commitments relating to:

        a) the minimum volume of investments;

        b) the minimum volume of production;

        c) compliance with the basic production process;

        d) the maintenance of production for a minimum period, including after the termination of the benefit.

        § 3º The benefit referred to in the caput is conditioned on:

         I - the carrying out of investments in research, development and technological innovation in the region, including in the field of automotive engineering,
  corresponding to at least 10% (ten percent) of the value of the presumed credit assessed, under the terms regulated by the Ministry of Development,
  Industry, Trade and Services - MDIC; and

        II - the tax compliance of the legal entity as to federal taxes.

        § 4º An act of the Executive Branch of the Union shall define the requirements and conditions of the requirements contained in item II of § 2º and in item I of § 3º.

        § 5º Compliance with the requirements and conditions referred to in item II of § 2º and item I of § 3º shall be evidenced before the MDIC.

        § 6º The MDIC shall send to the RFB, annually, the results of the audits relating to compliance with the requirements referred to in § 4º.



        Art. 310. The presumed credit referred to in art. 309 may not be enjoyed cumulatively with any other federal CBS tax benefits
  intended for the beneficiary of that presumed credit. Effective as of

        Art. 311. In relation to projects qualified for the benefits established by art. 11-C of Law No. 9,440, of March 14, 1997, the presumed credit
  referred to in art. 309 of this Complementary Law shall be calculated by applying the following percentages to the value of domestic market sales, in
  each month, of the products included in the projects referred to in art. 309, manufactured or assembled at the incentivized establishments: Effective as of

        I - 11.60% (eleven and sixty-hundredths percent) up to the 12th (twelfth) month of enjoyment of the benefit;

        II - 10% (ten percent) from the 13th (thirteenth) to the 48th (forty-eighth) month of enjoyment of the benefit;

        III - 8.70% (eight and seventy-hundredths percent) from the 49th (forty-ninth) to the 60th (sixtieth) month of enjoyment of the benefit.

         § 1º In calculating the presumed credit referred to in the caput, taxes and contributions levied on the sales transaction shall not be included, and
  unconditional discounts granted shall be excluded.

        § 2º The presumed credit referred to in the caput applies only to domestic market sales made with the full charging of the CBS, not including:

       I - sales that are exempt, immune, not covered by the levy of the contribution, at a zero rate, with a reduction of rates or of the tax base, or with
  suspension of the contribution; and

        II - cancelled and returned sales.

         § 3º The percentages referred to in items I to III of the caput shall be reduced at the rate of 20% (twenty percent) of the initial percentage per year, between 2029 and 2032,
  until they are extinguished as of 2033.

        Art. 312. In relation to projects qualified for the benefits established by arts. 1º to 4º of Law No. 9,826, of August 23, 1999, the presumed
  credit referred to in art. 309 of this Complementary Law shall correspond to the product of the multiplication of the following factors: Effective as of

       I - the value of domestic market sales, in each month, of the products included in the projects referred to in art. 309 of this Complementary Law, manufactured or
  assembled at the incentivized establishments;

        II - the rates of the Tax on Industrialized Products - IPI in force on December 31, 2025, in accordance with the Table of Incidence of the Tax on
  Industrialized Products - Tipi, including Supplementary Notes, relating to products classified under headings 8702 to 8704;

        III - the efficiency factor, which shall be the result of the calculation of 1 (one) less the rate referred to in item II, for each heading in the Tipi; and

        IV - the multiplying factor, which shall be:

        a) 32.00% (thirty-two percent) in the years 2027 and 2028;

        b) 25.60% (twenty-five and sixty-hundredths percent) in the year 2029;

        c) 19.20% (nineteen and twenty-hundredths percent) in the year 2030;

        d) 12.80% (twelve and eighty-hundredths percent) in the year 2031; and

        e) 6.40% (six and forty-hundredths percent) in the year 2032.

        Sole paragraph. The provision of §§ 1º and 2º of art. 311 of this Complementary Law applies to this article.

        Art. 313. Credits assessed as a result of the benefits referred to in art. 309 may only be used for:           Effective as of

        I - offsetting against CBS debits; and

        II - offsetting against the entity's own debits relating to taxes administered by the RFB, observing the conditions and limits in force for offsetting as of the date of the
  declaration.

        § 1º The credits referred to in this article:

        I - may not be transferred to another establishment of the legal entity;

        II - must be used only for the deduction and offsetting of the qualified establishment's own debits, located in the incentivized region; and

        III - may not be the subject of reimbursement.

        § 2º The own debits of the qualified establishment located in the incentivized region are considered to be the portion of the legal entity's federal tax and contribution
  debits by way of apportionment established in an Act of the Executive Branch of the Union.

        Art. 314. Failure to comply with the conditions required for enjoyment of the presumed credit may give rise to the following penalties:              Effective as of

        I - cancellation of the qualification with retroactive effects; or

        II - suspension of the qualification.

         Sole paragraph. The suspension of the qualification referred to in item II of the caput may be applied in the event of a finding of non-compliance, by the qualified
  legal entity, with the condition referred to in item II of § 3º of art. 309, the use of the presumed credit referred to in this Chapter remaining suspended until
  the reasons that gave rise to the suspension of the qualification are remedied.
         Art. 315. Cancellation of the authorization may be applied in the event of failure to comply with the requirements and conditions referred to in art. 309, even if
  it occurs after the period of appropriation of the presumed credit. Effective as of publication.

        § 1º Cancellation of the authorization shall result in the return of a portion of the presumed credit calculated for the period, together with the legal additions thereto, which
  shall correspond to the product of the multiplication of the following factors:

        I - total presumed credit calculated for the period fixed in the granting act;

        II - 100% (one hundred percent) reduced by the product of the multiplication of the following percentage values:

        a) F1%: result of dividing the sum of investments made by the establishment during the credit period by the minimum volume of investments in the
  credit period fixed in the act granting the benefit, such that F1% may not exceed 100.0% (one hundred percent);

        b) F2%: result of dividing the sum of the production volumes achieved by the establishment during the credit period by the minimum production volume
  in the credit period fixed in the act granting the benefit, such that F2% may not exceed 100.0% (one hundred percent); and


         c) F3%: result of dividing the period of maintenance of production at the establishment, including after termination of the benefit, by the minimum
  production period fixed in the act granting the benefit, including the period after termination of the benefit, such that F3% may not exceed 100.0% (one hundred
  percent).

        § 2º The portion of the presumed credit to be returned referred to in § 1º:

        I - shall be calculated by the MDIC, upon closing of the process of cancellation of the authorization, which must be initiated within 5 (five) years counted from the date of
  becoming aware of the failure to comply with the requirements and conditions referred to in art. 309;

        II - shall be subject to late-payment interest calculated in the same manner as that calculated on federal taxes, under the terms of the law, counted from the assessment period in
  which the event that gave rise to the cancellation of the authorization occurs; and

        III - must be paid by the last business day of the month following the cancellation of the authorization.

         § 3º The right of the tax administration to collect the return of the portion of the presumed credit referred to in this article shall be 5 (five) years counted from
  the first day of the month following the one in which the payment should have been made, pursuant to item III of § 2º.

         Art. 316. The IPI benefits established by art. 11-C of Law No. 9,440, of March 14, 1997, and by arts.
  1 to 4 of Law No. 9,826, of August 23, 1999, are extended until December 31, 2026, under the terms set forth in the aforementioned rules and in this article.

         § 1º During the period referred to in the caput, the conditions and requirements for enjoyment of the extended benefits remain enforceable under the same rules
  applicable to the beneficiary legal entity in the year 2025, whether arising from law or from the act granting the benefit.

         § 2º The presumed credit established by art. 11-C of Law No. 9,440, of March 14, 1997, shall be equivalent to the result of applying the rates
  provided for in art. 1 of Law No. 10,485, of July 3, 2002, to the value of domestic market sales, each month, of the products included in the projects
  approved for enjoyment of the benefit, multiplied by 0.75 (seventy-five hundredths).

                                                                                    TITLE VII

                                                                     ADMINISTRATION OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

                                                                                   CHAPTER I

                                                                     OF THE IBS AND CBS REGULATIONS

        Art. 317. It is the responsibility of:    Effective as of publication.

        I - the IBS Management Committee to issue the IBS regulation; and

        II - the Executive Branch of the Union to issue the CBS regulation.

        § 1º Provisions common to the IBS and the CBS, including subsequent amendments thereto, shall be approved by joint act of the IBS Management Committee and the
  Executive Branch of the Union and shall likewise be set out in the IBS regulation and the CBS regulation.

        § 2º All references made to "the regulation" in this Book shall be understood as a reference:

        I - to the IBS regulation, in the case of the IBS; and

        II - to the CBS regulation, in the case of the CBS.

                                                                                   CHAPTER II

                                                                     OF THE HARMONIZATION OF THE IBS AND THE CBS

        Art. 318. The IBS Management Committee, the RFB, and the Attorney General's Office of the National Treasury shall act with a view to harmonizing rules, interpretations, ancillary
  obligations, and procedures relating to the IBS and the CBS.

       Sole paragraph. For purposes of the provisions of the caput, the aforementioned bodies may enter into agreements for purposes of providing mutual assistance and
  sharing information relating to their respective taxes.

        Art. 319. Harmonization of the IBS and the CBS shall be ensured by the following bodies:

        I - Tax Administration Harmonization Committee composed of:

        a) 4 (four) representatives of the RFB; and

        b) 4 (four) representatives of the IBS Management Committee, 2 (two) of whom from the States or the Federal District and 2 (two) from the Municipalities or the Federal District; and

        II - Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices composed of:

        a) 4 (four) representatives of the Attorney General's Office of the National Treasury, appointed by the Union; and

        b) 4 (four) representatives of the Attorney's Offices, appointed by the IBS Management Committee, 2 (two) of whom being State or Federal District Attorneys and 2 (two)
  Municipal or Federal District Attorneys.

        § 1º The Committee provided for in item I of the caput shall be chaired and coordinated alternately by a representative of the RFB and by a representative of the IBS Management
  Committee, as provided for in its internal regulations.

         § 2º The Forum provided for in item II of the caput shall be chaired and coordinated alternately by a representative of the PGFN and by a representative of the attorneys
  appointed by the IBS Management Committee, as provided for in its internal regulations.

        Art. 320. The collegiate bodies referred to in art. 319:

        I - shall hold periodic meetings, subject to a minimum participation quorum of 3/4 (three quarters) of the representatives;

        II - shall decide, as provided in their internal regulations, by unanimity of those present;

        III - shall have their members appointed by the Minister of State for Finance, with respect to the representatives of the Union, and by the President of the IBS Management Committee,
  with respect to the representatives of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities; and

        IV - shall draw up their internal regulations by resolution.

        Art. 321. It is the responsibility of the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee to:

        I - standardize the regulation and interpretation of legislation relating to the IBS and the CBS with respect to common matters;
        II - prevent litigation relating to the common rules applicable to the IBS and the CBS; and

        III - deliberate on ancillary obligations and common procedures relating to the IBS and the CBS.

         Sole paragraph. The resolutions approved by the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee, from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette of the Union,
  shall bind the tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities.

        § 1º The resolutions approved by the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee, from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette of the Union, shall bind the
  tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º Harmonization of the interpretation of IBS and CBS legislation may be requested by the authorities referred to in § 1º of art. 322 and by any
  of the entities representing economic categories responsible for the nomination of taxpayer representatives on the IBS and CBS administrative
  adjudication bodies. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 3º A request for harmonization of the interpretation of IBS and CBS legislation, under the terms of § 2º of this article, shall be decided within 90 (ninety)
  business days counted from the date the request is submitted. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 4º In exercising the powers provided for in the items of the caput of this article, the decisions of the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee
  must be substantiated. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 322. It is the responsibility of the Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices to:

       I - act as an advisory body to the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee in the activities of standardizing and interpreting the common
  rules relating to the IBS and the CBS; and

        II - analyze significant and widespread legal disputes relating to the IBS and the CBS raised under the terms of § 1º.

        II - analyze legal disputes relating to the IBS and the CBS raised under the terms of § 1º.   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º The Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices shall examine matters relating to significant and widespread legal disputes relating
  to the IBS and the CBS raised by the following authorities:

         § 1º The Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices shall examine matters relating to legal disputes relating to the IBS and the CBS
  raised by the following authorities: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the President of the IBS Management Committee; and

        II - the Minister of State for Finance.

        § 2º The resolutions approved by the Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices, from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette of the Union, shall bind the
  Attorney General's Office of the National Treasury and the Attorney's Offices of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities.

        Art. 323. A joint act of the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee and the Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices must be
  observed, from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Union, in the administrative, normative, and adjudicatory acts carried out by the tax administrations of the
  Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities and in the acts of the Attorney General's Office of the National Treasury and the Attorney's Offices of the States, the Federal District,
  and the Municipalities.

        Sole paragraph. It is the responsibility of the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee and the Legal Harmonization Forum of the Attorney's Offices, within the scope of
  their respective competencies, to propose the joint act referred to in the caput.

        Art. 323-A. The person liable for a tax obligation is guaranteed the right to submit a written inquiry regarding the application of IBS and
  CBS tax legislation, with respect to a specific matter of interest, which must be completely and exactly described in the petition. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        § 1º The inquiry shall contain: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the identification of the party submitting the inquiry; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - the matter of law that is the subject of the doubt; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        III - the date of the taxable event of the principal or ancillary obligation, if it has already occurred; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        IV - a declaration as to the existence or non-existence of the commencement of a tax procedure with respect to the party submitting the inquiry. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 2º Each inquiry must refer to a single matter, cumulation being admitted only when related questions are involved.                   (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 323-B. The resolution of an inquiry relating to the interpretation and application of IBS and CBS legislation shall be issued by the respective bodies of the CGIBS and the
  RFB, subject to the provisions of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º Once the proposed resolution of the inquiry has been drafted, the consulted body shall make the draft available in a shared virtual environment for evaluation by the other
  body, which may, within 30 (thirty) days counted from the date of availability, extendable, upon justification, once, for an equal period:  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        I - accept the draft and jointly issue the resolution of the inquiry; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       II - forward the proposal for deliberation by the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee, in the event of divergence; or               (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

        III - state that there is no matter common to the IBS and the CBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º Forwarding the proposed resolution for deliberation by the Tax Administration Harmonization Committee shall suspend the processing of the
  inquiry procedure before the consulted body until a resolution is issued under the terms of § 1º of art. 321 of this Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 3º If the period referred to in § 1º of this article elapses without a response from the other body, the shared draft shall be deemed tacitly accepted and a
  joint resolution of the inquiry shall be published, with a statement of tacit acceptance by one of the bodies. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 4º The regulation shall govern the procedure referred to in this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 323-C. The inquiry produces the following effects: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - no tax procedure shall be initiated with respect to the matter inquired about, during the period between the filing of the inquiry request and
  notice of the response, provided that the filing occurred before the due date of the obligation to which it refers; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)
         II - it binds the tax administrations and the taxpayer submitting the inquiry, within the limits of the specific matter that was the subject of the analysis, without binding third parties.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. The tax due in accordance with the response to the inquiry shall be paid without the imposition of a penalty, provided that: (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

       I - payment is made within 15 (fifteen) days counted from the date on which the party submitting the inquiry becomes aware of the response;         (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - the filing of the inquiry petition occurred before the due date of the obligation to which it refers.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        Art. 323-D. The inquiry does not suspend the deadline for payment of the tax, before or after it is submitted, nor the deadline for compliance with
  ancillary obligations to which the party submitting the inquiry is subject. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Sole paragraph. The effects provided for in art. 323-C shall not apply to inquiries that: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - contain inaccurate or untrue data; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - do not describe exactly and completely the matter that gave rise to them; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         III - are merely dilatory, understood as those dealing with provisions clearly stated in the tax legislation or with a question
  of law already resolved by a final administrative or judicial decision; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        IV - fail to observe a formal requirement that is not remedied within the period established by the tax authority;      (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

        V - deal with an allegation of unconstitutionality or with the refusal to apply tax legislation;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

          VI - are submitted after the commencement of a tax procedure with respect to the matter inquired about. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 323-E. The tax that is the subject of the matter inquired about shall not be assessed against the taxpayer who acts in strict accordance with the resolution of the
  inquiry, of which they have been notified, so long as it has not been revoked, in whole or in part. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º A change in guidance does not require payment of the tax deemed due for a taxable event that occurred between the date of notification of the
  amended resolution and the date of the new guidance. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º While a response to an inquiry submitted is pending, the taxpayer shall also be deemed notified of the resolution of the inquiry upon the publication of
  any normative act dealing with the same matter. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 3º The subsequent enactment of a tax legislation rule shall cause the effects of the response to the inquiry to cease insofar as the rule conflicts with the response,
  regardless of communication to the party submitting the inquiry. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Art. 323-F. No appeal or motion for reconsideration shall be admissible against the resolution of the inquiry or the order declaring it ineffective.                (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         Sole paragraph. The resolution of the inquiry shall be final and shall be issued within the period defined in the regulation, counted from the date of its filing.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                 CHAPTER II-A
                                                               (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                             OF THE INTEGRATION OF IBS AND CBS LITIGATION

        Art. 323-G. A special appeal is admissible, within 10 (ten) business days, against a decision of the CGIBS issued by an Appellate Adjudication Chamber or by a First-Instance
  Adjudication Chamber under summary proceedings, or against a decision of a Chamber, panel of a Chamber, extraordinary panel, or special panel of the Administrative Council of Tax Appeals
  (Carf), that gives the common IBS and CBS legislation a legal interpretation diverging from that given to it by another
  decision of those adjudication bodies, with a view to standardizing administrative case law on matters common to the two taxes.          (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 1º The appeal referred to in the caput shall be examined by the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and CBS Administrative Litigation, composed of:
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       I - 4 (four) counselors representing the National Treasury on the Superior Chamber of Tax Appeals of Carf, appointed by the Minister of State for
  Finance; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - 4 (four) members of the Superior Chamber of the CGIBS, 2 (two) of whom from the tax administrations of the States and the Federal District and 2 (two) from the
  tax administrations of the Municipalities and the Federal District, appointed by the CGIBS; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        III - 4 (four) taxpayer representatives, 2 (two) of whom from among the counselors of the Superior Chamber of Tax Appeals of Carf and 2 (two) from among
  the members of the Superior Chamber of the CGIBS, appointed respectively by the Minister of State for Finance and by the CGIBS; (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

          IV - the President, who shall vote only in the event of a tie. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 2º The petition for filing the special appeal must transcribe the headnote and the pertinent excerpts of the paradigm decision, sufficient to demonstrate
  the existence of a divergence regarding the common IBS and CBS legislation. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 3º The following may file a special appeal: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - the representation of the Public Treasury; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - the taxpayer. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 4º The special appeal suspends the enforceability of the tax credit. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 5º Decisions rendered in special appeal proceedings: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       I - are not bound by the grounds presented by the parties and may diverge both from the paradigm ruling and from the decision under appeal;          (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

       II - may not set aside the application of, or fail to observe, tax legislation on the grounds of unconstitutionality or illegality; (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)


           III - are limited to the examination of questions of law, with review of the factual and evidentiary record prohibited; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       IV - shall be published in the Official Gazette of the Union and, from the date of their publication, shall bind the adjudication bodies of the Union and of the CGIBS.                 (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 6º No appeal is admissible against the collegiate decision of the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and CBS Administrative Litigation that denies admission of the special
  appeal. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 7º A joint act of the CGIBS and the Minister of State for Finance shall regulate the provisions of this article, including with respect to the terms of office of the adjudicators
  referred to in § 1º. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 8º The Presidency of the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and CBS Administrative Litigation shall be held, on an alternating basis, by a representative
  of the National Treasury or by a representative of the CGIBS, in the manner established in the joint act referred to in § 7º of this article.            (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Art. 323-H. A motion for a standardization incident before the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and
  CBS Administrative Litigation is admissible: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - for recurring matters, when there are repeated rulings on the same question of law, subject to the provisions of arts. 323-I and 323-J;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       II - for a second-instance decision that fails to apply a binding ruling, subject to the provisions of arts. 323-K and 323-L.                     (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 1º The judgment of the standardization incident for recurring matters shall establish a legal thesis on the matter, and it shall be the responsibility of the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and
  CBS Administrative Litigation to issue a binding precedent that shall have the character of a binding ruling from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Union.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 2º The binding effect referred to in § 1º of this article also extends to all challenges and appeals, pending or future, that deal with an
  identical question of law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 3º Review of the thesis established in the standardization incident may be sought either on the adjudicator's own initiative or upon request by the parties entitled to do so under arts. 323-J and 323-L.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 4º A joint act of the CGIBS and the Minister of State for Finance shall govern the processing of the incident referred to in this article. (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 323-I. The motion for the standardization incident referred to in item I of the caput of art. 323-H must be accompanied by 5 (five) final
  decisions rendered by an Adjudication Chamber of the CGIBS or by a Chamber, panel of a Chamber, extraordinary panel, or special panel of Carf, or by 3 (three)
  decisions rendered by the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and CBS Administrative Litigation, by, at a minimum, a majority vote, in distinct
  adjudication sessions, under penalty of the motion not being admitted. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

           Art. 323-J. The following may raise the standardization incident referred to in item I of the caput of art. 323-H: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

           I - the representation of the Public Treasury; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - the Presidents of an Adjudication Chamber of the CGIBS, the Presidents of a Chamber, panel of a Chamber, extraordinary panel, or special panel of Carf, or the
  President of the National Chamber for the Integration of IBS and CBS Administrative Litigation. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. The standardization incident referred to in item I of the caput of art. 323-H shall not suspend the enforceability of the tax credit. (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 323-K. The motion for the standardization incident referred to in item II of the caput of art. 323-H must be accompanied by an indication of the
  binding ruling that the second-instance decision failed to apply. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

           Art. 323-L. The following may raise the standardization incident referred to in item II of the caput of art. 323-H: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

           I - the representation of the Public Treasury; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

           II - the taxpayer. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. The standardization incident referred to in item II of the caput of art. 323-H shall suspend the enforceability of the tax credit. (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Art. 323-M. A joint act of the CGIBS and the Minister of State for Finance shall regulate the provisions of arts. 323-H to 323-L.                              (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                     CHAPTER III

                                                                DEFICIENCY AUDITS AND EX OFFICIO ASSESSMENT

                                                                                        Section I

                                                                           Of the Power to Audit

           Art. 324. The audit of compliance with principal and ancillary tax obligations, as well as the establishment of the tax credit relating:

           I - to the CBS is the responsibility of the tax authority that is part of the tax administration of the Union;

           II - to the IBS is the responsibility of the tax authorities that are part of the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities.

           Art. 325. The RFB and the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities:

         I - may use in their respective assessments the grounds and evidence arising from the ex officio assessment administrative proceeding carried out by
  another federative entity;

           II - shall share, in the same environment, the records of the commencement and outcome of CBS and IBS audits.

           § 1º The environment referred to in item II of the caput shall be jointly managed by the IBS Management Committee and the RFB.

           § 2º A joint act of the Management Committee and the RFB may provide for other cases of information to be shared in the environment referred to in item II of the
  caput.

        § 3º The use of the grounds and evidence referred to in item I of the caput, even if relating to closed administrative proceedings, does not dispense with the
  opportunity for the taxpayer to exercise adversarial proceedings and a full defense.
          § 4º In the environment referred to in item II of the caput of this article:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - the responses, clarifications, and documents provided in response to the following shall be kept on file:         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        a) an audit procedure of any of the federative entities, it being prohibited to request, in another audit procedure relating to the same
  taxable events and the same period, the same responses, clarifications, and documents; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        b) an administrative tax proceeding of any of the federative entities, which shall be taken into account by the adjudication bodies in other
  administrative tax proceedings relating to the same facts and assessment period; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       II - accesses to and the sharing of the information and documents contained therein shall be recorded, with at least the following being required:                        (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) identification of the permanent public servant responsible for the access;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) date, time, and reason for the access;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          c) a history of accesses and changes made;    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - the following information and documents shall not be shared:         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         a) information obtained on the basis of international treaties, agreements, or conventions for the exchange of tax information whose sharing is prohibited
  by the treaty, agreement, or convention, unless there is consent and it is authorized under the domestic legislation of the reporting country; (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) information protected by judicial secrecy;   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          c) information obtained on the basis of the provisions of art. 6 of Complementary Law No. 105, of January 10, 2001.              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

         Art. 326. The RFB and the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities may enter into an agreement for the reciprocal delegation of the
  activity of auditing the IBS and the CBS in low-value tax proceedings, understood as those in which the assessment does not exceed a single threshold established
  in the regulation.

         Art. 327. The Ministry of Finance and the IBS Management Committee may enter into an agreement for the reciprocal delegation of the adjudication of administrative litigation
  relating to the ex officio assessment of the IBS and the CBS carried out under the terms of art. 326.

         Art. 327-A. In the Manaus Free Trade Zone and in the Free Trade Areas, Suframa shall exercise, exclusively through its permanent staff, the
  activities of auditing compliance with the basic production process or with other commitments undertaken by the taxpayer at the time of approval of the
  economic project, of investments in research, development, and innovation and, without prejudice to the powers of the tax administrations, of the entry of
  goods and services. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º Suframa shall notify the federal, Federal District, State, and Municipal tax administrations that are part of the incentivized areas, whenever
  a failure to comply with the provisions of the caput is found. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º The tax administrations and other interested public bodies may submit a substantiated request for Suframa to institute a proceeding
  to verify compliance with the basic production process or with other commitments undertaken by the taxpayer at the time of approval of the economic
  project and of investments in research, development, and innovation referred to in the caput of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 3º (VETOED).      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                        Section II

                                                                     Of the Audit and the Tax Procedure

          Art. 328. The tax procedure begins with:

        I - notice to the taxpayer, its representative, or agent, of the first ex officio act, carried out by a tax authority that is part of the tax administrations
  of the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities, aimed at establishing a tax obligation or infraction;

          II - the seizure of goods;

          III - the seizure of documents or books, including in digital form;

          IV - the commencement of customs clearance of imported goods.

       § 1º The commencement of the tax procedure excludes the spontaneity of the taxpayer with respect to prior acts and, regardless of notification, that
  of the other parties involved in the infractions found.

         § 2º For purposes of the provisions of § 1º, the acts referred to in items I to III of the caput shall remain valid for a period of 90 (ninety) days, extendable, successively, for
  an equal period, by any other act that formalizes the continuation of the work.

          Art. 329. The following actions do not exclude the spontaneity of the taxpayer:

        I - data cross-referencing, understood as the comparison of information existing in the databases of the tax administrations or of the IBS Management
  Committee, or between such information and other information provided by the taxpayer or third parties;

         II - monitoring, understood as the evaluation of the tax-fiscal behavior of a taxpayer, individually or by economic sector, through
  ongoing oversight of compliance with obligations and analysis of economic-fiscal data, submitted or obtained by the tax administrations or by the IBS Management
  Committee, including through inspections of the establishment.

                                                                                        Section III

                                                                                Of Ex Officio Assessment

         Art. 330. In order to establish the tax credit arising from a tax procedure, by way of ex officio assessment, the tax authority that is part of the tax
  administration of the Union and the tax authorities that are part of the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities must issue a notice
  of infraction.

          Sole paragraph. The notice of infraction shall necessarily contain:

          § 1º The notice of infraction shall necessarily contain:    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - identification of the person cited;


        II - the place, date, and time of issuance;

        III - a description of the act;

        IV - the legal provision infringed and the applicable penalty;

        V - the determination of the demand and notification to comply with it or challenge it within the legal period;

        VI - the signature of the issuing officer, indication of the position, and registration number;

        VII - identification of the federative entity responsible for the assessment, in the case of a notice of infraction relating to the IBS.

        § 2º The issuance of the ex officio assessment act and its supporting documentation must be implemented electronically.              (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

        § 3º The issuance of the ex officio assessment act does not prevent the adoption of consensual dispute-resolution procedures for tax disputes.             (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 331. The demand for the tax credit and the imposition of a stand-alone penalty shall be the subject of separate notices of infraction for each tax or penalty.

        Sole paragraph. The provisions of the caput of this article also apply in cases in which, upon a violation of tax legislation being found, it does not
  result in a demand for a tax credit.

                                                                                     Section IV

                                                           Of the Electronic Tax Domicile - DTE and of Notifications

        Art. 332. Notifications of acts in the proceeding shall be made through the DTE, including in the case of notification of an attorney-in-fact.

        § 1º Notification made through the DTE is deemed personal, for all legal purposes.

        § 2º (VETOED).

        § 3º The tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities may effect notification in person, by the party initiating the
  procedure or by an agent of the body preparing the proceeding, at the office or elsewhere, evidenced by the signature of the taxpayer, its agent, attorney-in-fact, or
  legal representative, or, in the event of refusal, by a written certificate drawn up by the person effecting notification, identifying the person who refused.

         § 4º The bankrupt estate and the legal entity in extrajudicial liquidation shall be notified at the DTE of the legal entity, it being the responsibility of the judicial administrator and the
  liquidator, respectively, to update the physical and electronic address thereof.

         Art. 333. The RFB and the IBS Management Committee may establish an electronic communication system, with shared governance, to be designated as the DTE,
  which shall be used by the RFB and by the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities, for purposes of notice, notification, or advisories
  provided for in the CBS and IBS legislation.

        Art. 334. (VETOED).

                                                                                     Section V

                                                                             Of Legal Presumptions

        Art. 335. The following shall constitute omission of revenue and the occurrence of transactions subject to CBS and IBS incidence:

       I - the occurrence of transactions involving tangible or intangible property, including rights, or involving services, without the issuance of a tax document or without the issuance of a
  proper tax document;

        II - a credit balance in the cash account, shown in the bookkeeping or found in an audit procedure;

        III - maintenance, as a liability, of obligations already paid or whose enforceability is not proven;

        IV - failure to record in the books payments made by the legal entity;

        V - a hidden asset, whose entry does not appear in the accounts for the period covered by the audit procedure;

        VI - failure to make an accounting record of a document relating to transactions involving tangible or intangible property, including rights, or involving services;

        VII - amounts credited to a deposit or investment account maintained at a financial institution, with respect to which the holder, whether a natural person or a legal entity,
  duly notified, does not prove, by means of proper documentation, the origin of the funds used in such transactions;

         VIII - a cash advance provided to the company by a manager, partner, holder of a sole proprietorship, or controlling shareholder of the company, including by third parties,
  if the effectiveness of the delivery and the origin of the funds are not satisfactorily demonstrated;

         IX - a difference found through the quantitative control of the inflows and outflows of transactions involving tangible or intangible property, including rights, or involving
  services during a given period, taking into account the opening and closing balances;

        X - inventory valued in a manner inconsistent with what is provided for in tax legislation, for inventory purposes;

        XI - the write-off of liabilities whose offsetting entry does not correspond to actual debt settlement, reversal of a provision, exchange of amounts within liabilities, or
  a justified conversion of the obligation into revenue or transfer to equity accounts, in accordance with accounting bookkeeping standards;

         XII - amounts received by the taxpayer, reported by financial institutions, credit and debit card administrators, any institution
  participating in a payment arrangement, entities providing commercial intermediation in a virtual environment or related to electronic commerce, commercial
  condominiums, or another legal entity legally holding financial information, in excess of the amount of the transactions declared by the person liable for the tax
  obligation; and

         XIII - net revenue for the period analyzed that is lower than the cost of the goods sold, the cost of the merchandise sold, and the cost of the services rendered.

        § 1º The amount of revenue omitted for purposes of assessing federal taxes and the IBS, including under specific legal presumptions, shall be taken into account in determining the
  tax base for the assessment of the CBS and the IBS.

        § 2º The taxpayer shall bear the burden of proving the rebuttal of the presumptions referred to in this article.

        § 3º Where it is not possible to identify the moment of occurrence of the taxable event, in the cases provided for in this article, it shall be presumed to have occurred,
  observing the following order, on the last day:


        I - of the assessment period;

        II - of the fiscal year; or

        III - of the period audited.

        § 4º Where it is not possible to identify the place of the transaction, it shall be deemed to have occurred at the place of the taxpayer's principal domicile.

                                                                                        Section VI

                                                                         Of Tax and Supporting Documentation

        Art. 336. Bookkeeping records of the legal entity relating to matters that affect accounting entries in future fiscal years shall
  be retained until the right of the Public Treasury to establish the tax credits relating to those fiscal years lapses.

        Art. 337. A taxpayer that uses a data-processing system must maintain complete and up-to-date technical documentation of the system, sufficient
  to allow it to be audited, maintenance in digital form being permitted, without prejudice to its printing, when requested.

                                                                                     Section VII

                                                                      Of the Special Audit Regime - REF

        Art. 338. Without prejudice to other measures provided for in the legislation, the RFB and the tax administrations of the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities
  may impose a Special Audit Regime - REF for compliance with tax obligations, in the following cases:

        I - obstruction of the audit, characterized by an unjustified refusal to provide documents or information, even if partial, regarding transactions
  involving goods or services, financial movements, business, or activity, whether one's own or that of third parties, when notified, and other cases that authorize a request for
  the assistance of the police force, under the terms of art. 200 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 - National Tax Code;

         II - resistance to the audit, characterized by refusal of access to the establishment, tax domicile, or any other location where the activities of the taxpayer are carried out, or the
  activities related to the goods or services in its possession or ownership;

         III - evidence that the legal entity is constituted through parties standing in for others who are not the true partners or shareholders, or the holder, in the case of a
  sole proprietorship;

        IV - carrying out transactions subject to tax incidence without the proper registration in the appropriate taxpayer register;

        V - repeated commission of violations of tax legislation;

        VI - marketing of goods with evidence of smuggling or contraband;

        VII - conduct that constitutes a crime against the tax order.

        § 1º In the cases provided for in items IV to VII of the caput, application of the REF does not depend on the prior institution of an audit procedure.

        § 2º For purposes of the provisions of item V of the caput, repeated commission shall be understood as:

        I - the second occurrence of identical violations of tax legislation, including of an ancillary nature, found with respect to the last 5 (five) calendar
  years, formalized by means of a notice of infraction; or

          II - the occurrence, in 2 (two) or more assessment periods, consecutive or alternating, of violations of tax legislation, where it is found that a device,
  scheme, or any other fraudulent means was used with a view to suppressing, deferring, or reducing payment of the tax.

         § 3º For purposes of application of the provisions of item I of § 2º, violations of an ancillary nature that do not prejudice the assessment and
  collection of the principal obligations or that are not a requirement for taking advantage of a tax benefit shall not be taken into account, without prejudice to the application of the sanction provided for the
  conduct.

        § 4º Application of the REF must be based on a detailed report prepared by the responsible tax authority, which must contain, at a minimum:

        I - identification of the taxpayer subject to the audit procedure;

        II - the classification under one or more of the cases provided for in the caput;

        III - a description of the facts justifying application of the regime;

        IV - a copy of the notices issued and the notifications made;

        V - the proposed measures provided for in art. 339 to be adopted and the period of validity of the regime; and

        VI - identification of the tax authority responsible for carrying out the audit procedure.

        § 5º The REF shall begin upon notice, to the taxpayer, of a substantiated order, which shall state the grounds, the measures adopted, and the
  duration.

        Art. 339. The special audit regime may consist of:

        I - maintenance of uninterrupted oversight at the taxpayer's establishment;

        II - reduction, by half, of the assessment periods and of the deadlines for payment of the CBS and the IBS;

        III - compulsory use of electronic control of the transactions carried out;

        IV - a requirement of daily payment of the CBS and the IBS levied on the transactions carried out by the taxpayer, without prejudice to the use of the
  credits of those taxes by the taxpayer, under the terms of art. 53 of this Complementary Law;

        V - a requirement of systematic proof of compliance with tax obligations; and

        VI - special control of the issuance of commercial and tax documents and monitoring of financial movements.

        Art. 340. Application of the REF shall be governed:

        I - by the RFB, with respect to the CBS; and

        II - by the IBS Management Committee, with respect to the IBS.


          § 1º In regulating the REF, the RFB and the Management Committee must:

        I - require that the order referred to in § 5º of art. 338 be issued by an authority hierarchically superior to the tax authority responsible for the
  audit procedure, in order to apply the REF; and

         II - provide for a maximum duration for the REF, which may only be renewed, by means of a new substantiated order, in cases where the
  circumstances warranting its application persist.

          § 2º In defining the measures provided for in art. 339 applicable to the taxpayer, the tax authority must:

          I - consider the seriousness and harmfulness of the conduct engaged in; and

          II - limit itself to the measures necessary for the audit activity in the specific situation.

        Art. 341. The imposition of the special audit regime does not preclude the application of penalties provided for in tax legislation, nor does it exempt the taxpayer
  from compliance with other obligations, including ancillary ones, not covered by the regime.

         § 1º Ex officio fines applicable to the CBS and the IBS shall have their percentage doubled for violations committed by the taxpayer during the period in which it
  is subject to the REF, without prejudice to the adoption of other measures provided for in tax, administrative, or criminal legislation.

        § 2º In cases in which the measures referred to in items II to IV of the caput of art. 339 have been applied, the payment deadlines established under the
  REF must be observed for purposes of the ex officio assessment.

                                                                                  CHAPTER IV
                                                               (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                      OF INFRACTIONS AND PENALTIES RELATING TO THE IBS AND THE CBS

         Art. 341-A. Any act or omission, even if involuntary, that results in a failure by the taxpayer to observe a principal
  or ancillary tax obligation constitutes an infraction. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 341-B. Punitive fines shall be calculated after the addition referred to in item II of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.          (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Art. 341-C. The Standard Fiscal Unit for Taxes on Goods and Services (UPF) is hereby established, in the amount of R$ 200.00 (two hundred reais), to be updated
  annually by the change in the IPCA or another index that may replace it. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Sole paragraph. A joint act of the CGIBS and the RFB shall publish the updated amount of the UPF referred to in the caput of this article.                     (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         Art. 341-D. Penalties shall be cumulative when they result from the simultaneous non-compliance with ancillary and principal tax obligations.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. When the amount of tax due has already served as the basis for application of the punitive fine, the late-payment fine provided for in item I of § 2º of art. 29
  of this Complementary Law shall not apply, until the date of notice of the ex officio assessment. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 341-E. Application of the penalties provided for in this Title does not exclude:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the requirement to pay the unpaid tax, together with the applicable legal additions, where applicable; and            (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        II - revocation of licenses, concessions, or authorizations, ex officio deregistration from the CNPJ, the imposition of special audit and
  collection regimes, cancellation of the authorization for tax benefits, exclusion from special taxation regimes, or reports to the authorities for criminal purposes, among
  other administrative measures provided for by law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 341-F. A fine of 75% (seventy-five percent) shall apply in cases of ex officio assessment:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - on the amount of tax not declared or declared at less than its true value and not paid or not collected, in whole or in part; or          (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

          II - on the amount of the improper credit, due to its improper use.   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º In cases of tax evasion, fraud, simulation, or collusion, regardless of other applicable administrative or criminal penalties, the fine shall be
  increased to: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - 100% (one hundred percent) of the total amount or the difference in the tax that is the subject of the ex officio assessment;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         II - 150% (one hundred and fifty percent) of the total amount or the difference in the tax that is the subject of the ex officio assessment, in cases where the
  taxpayer is found to be a repeat offender. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 2º For purposes of the provisions of this article, the following shall be understood:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - tax evasion: any willful act or omission tending to prevent or delay, in whole or in part, the tax authority's becoming aware of:
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) the occurrence of the taxable event of the principal tax obligation, its nature, or material circumstances;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        b) the personal circumstances of the taxpayer, capable of affecting the principal tax obligation or the corresponding tax credit;      (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - fraud: any willful act or omission tending to prevent or delay, in whole or in part, the occurrence of the taxable event of the principal tax obligation,
  or to exclude or modify its essential characteristics, so as to reduce the amount of tax due, to avoid it, or to defer its payment;       (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - (VETOED);    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        IV - collusion: a willful arrangement between 2 (two) or more natural or legal persons, aimed at any of the effects referred to in items I to III of this
  paragraph; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       V - repeat offense: the commission of a new infraction classified as tax evasion, fraud, simulation, or collusion, by the same legal entity or its
  successors, considering all of its establishments together, or by the same natural person, within 3 (three) years counted from the date on which the
  prior assessment was made. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)



       § 3º The fine referred to in item I of the caput of this article shall be 50% (fifty percent) of the portion of the tax that is the subject of the ex officio assessment,
  provided that the declaration correctly describes the goods or services and the respective quantities, as well as the value of the transaction.                    (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 4º The repeat offense referred to in item V of § 2º of this article is voided if liability for the infraction identified in the prior
  assessment has been set aside by a final decision at the administrative level or a judicial decision that is no longer subject to appeal. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        § 5º Reimbursement of the amount paid in excess is guaranteed, where the repeat offense has been set aside under the terms of § 4º of this article, and the taxpayer
  has paid the increased fine based on item V of § 2º of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 6º The amount to be reimbursed referred to in § 5º of this article shall be adjusted by the Selic rate, from the date of actual payment.             (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)
        Art. 341-G. The fines to be applied due to infractions for non-compliance with ancillary tax obligations of the IBS or the CBS are the
  following: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          I - failing to register in the registry with unique identification referred to in art. 59 of this Complementary Law, within the period set forth in regulation: 10 (ten)
  UPF; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         II - failing to update the principal domicile provided for in item "b" of subsection I of § 3 of art. 11 of this Complementary Law in the registry with unique identification referred to in
  art. 59 of this Complementary Law, when there is a change, observing the form and time limit set forth in regulation: 10 (ten) UPF per infraction; (Incluído
  pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        III - failing to notify the tax administration of the sale or transfer of an establishment and the closure or temporary suspension of activities,
  in the form and within the time limits established in tax legislation: 10 (ten) UPF per infraction; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         IV - delivering late, failing to deliver, to record, to make available or to maintain, or maintaining, recording or delivering in disagreement with tax
  legislation, including with respect to non-compliance with a deadline set in a tax notice, electronic files resulting from the issuance of tax documents or
  their bookkeeping, informational document of economic or tax activity, periodic returns or other information required by legislation necessary
  for bookkeeping or tax assessment: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          a) 20 (twenty) UPF per assessment period, regardless of tax notice; and (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          b) 30 (thirty) UPF per assessment period and for each tax notice; (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         V - installing or keeping installed a program, software, tax application or technological solution that enables the issuance of tax documents with suppression
  or reduction of tax or transaction amounts or that does not meet the requirements established in tax legislation: 100 (one hundred) UPF per equipment;
  (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         VI - developing, supplying or installing a program, software, tax application or technological solution for third parties that enables the issuance of tax
  documents with suppression or reduction of tax or transaction amounts or that does not meet the requirements established in tax legislation: 150 (one hundred and
  fifty) UPF per equipment; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         VII - failing to use or using in disagreement with tax legislation a volume measurement mechanism required and controlled by the tax
  administration: 100 (one hundred) UPF per equipment; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       VIII - failing to notify or notifying after the deadline set forth in tax legislation the invalidation of a tax document number: 1 (one) UPF per
  number; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         IX - the acquirer or recipient, with respect to a tax document issued by a third party, even under contingency, failing to confirm the transaction, to
  report their lack of knowledge, the cancellation of the deal, to report the return of the goods, in the form and under the conditions set forth in tax
  legislation: 1 (one) UPF per document; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        X - failing to comply with the duty of cooperation with the tax authorities, through obstruction of or resistance to tax enforcement action, under the terms of subsections I and II of the caput of art. 338 of this
  Complementary Law, by any means: 50 (fifty) UPF per event; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         XI - supplying, acquiring, importing, receiving, transporting, delivering, causing entry or exit of, or keeping in storage a good, or providing, making available or receiving a service,
  without cover of a tax document, including declarations of information necessary for the assessment of the IBS and the CBS: 100% (one hundred percent) of the value of the
  reference tax; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XII - covering the transit of a good more than once or providing a transport service more than once, using the same tax document: 100% (one hundred
  percent) of the value of the reference tax; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XIII - issuing or using an invalid tax document, including the auxiliary document linked to it: 66% (sixty-six percent) of the value of the reference tax;
  (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XIV - falsifying, adulterating, losing or destroying a tax document: 100% (one hundred percent) of the value of the reference tax; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar
  nº 227, de 2026)

        XV - unduly appropriating or failing to make the reversal or cancellation of a tax credit in the cases provided for in legislation: 66% (sixty-six percent) of the
  credit; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         XVI - failing to issue a tax document referring to the acquisition or entry of a good or the acquisition of a service, within the time limit and in the cases provided for in tax
  legislation: 100% (one hundred percent) of the value of the reference tax; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          XVII - cancelling a tax document or electronic transaction record information: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          a) after the occurrence of the taxable event: 66% (sixty-six percent) of the value of the reference tax; or (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

         b) after the deadline for cancellation of a tax document set forth in tax legislation: 33% (thirty-three percent) of the value of the reference tax;
  (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XVIII - reporting a Prior Declaration of Issuance under Contingency with a value diverging from that stated in the respective tax document: 33% (thirty-three
  percent) of the value of the difference; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XIX - omitting information relating to import or export transactions, or providing it inaccurately or incompletely, provided that it is necessary to
  determine the tax control procedure: 100 (one hundred) UPF per piece of information; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        XX - violating a security device affixed by the tax authorities to a cargo unit: 10 (ten) UPF per device; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227,
  de 2026)

       XXI - failing to comply with ancillary obligations related to the specific controls for verifying the entry of material goods into the Manaus Free Trade Zone
  (ZFM) or into a Free Trade Area, including customs clearance and inspection: 66% (sixty-six percent) of the value of the reference tax; (Incluído
  pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         XXII - the facility accredited for purposes of specific controls for verifying the entry of material goods into the Manaus Free Trade Zone or into a
  Free Trade Area failing to meet the minimum infrastructure requirements set forth at the time of its accreditation: 20 (twenty) UPF per required requirement.
  (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       § 1 The penalties referred to in this article shall be increased by 50% (fifty percent) in the case of specific recidivism. (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         § 2 For purposes of the provision in § 1 of this article, specific recidivism is considered to be recurrence of an infraction provided for in the same subsection of the caput of this
  article, by the same legal entity or its successors, considering together all of its establishments, or by the same natural person,
  within 3 (three) years counted from the date on which the prior assessment was made. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 3 For purposes of the provision in § 1 of this article, the provisions of §§ 4 to 6 of art. 341-F apply. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        § 4 The penalties provided for in subsection IV of this article do not apply in case of mere failure or material error that does not prejudice
  knowledge of the nature, description, origin and destination of the transaction. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        § 5 For purposes of the provision in subsections XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XVI, XVII and XXI of the caput of this article, the value of the reference tax corresponds to: (Incluído pela
  Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        I - from 2027, for the CBS, and from 2033, for the IBS, the multiplication of the reference rate by the value of the transaction, even if it is an
  immune, exempt transaction, subject to a zero rate, reduced rate or reduced tax base, covered by deferral or suspension; (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - in the period from 2027 to 2032, for the IBS, the multiplication of the percentage corresponding to double the CBS reference rate by the value of the
  transaction; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          III - in 2026: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          a) for the CBS, 6% (six percent) of the value of the transaction; and (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          b) for the IBS, 12% (twelve percent) of the value of the transaction. (Incluída pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       § 6 For purposes of the provision in subsection XIII of the caput of this article, an invalid tax document is considered to be, among others, one:
  (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          I - that does not effectively correspond to a transaction involving a good or service or to the acquisition of a good or service; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          II - in which a person or establishment other than the one to whom the good or service was in fact intended, or who, in
  fact, acquired the good or service, is listed as recipient or acquirer. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 7 For purposes of the provision in subsection XIX of the caput of this article: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         I - information necessary to determine the tax control procedure is considered to be information that identifies those responsible for the transaction, indicates the
  economic destination of the good or service and the countries of origin, provenance and acquisition, and describes the essential characteristics of the material good;
  (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - if more than one of the infractions occurs for the same good or service, the fine applies only once; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº
  227, de 2026)

          III - the amount of the fine may not exceed 1% (one percent) of the total value of the transaction stated in the corresponding tax document, subject to the
  lower limit of 50 (fifty) UPF. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          Art. 341-H. The fines referred to in arts. 341-F and 341-G may be paid with the following reductions: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

       I - 50% (fifty percent) of the penalty applied, if full payment of the tax credit is made within the period provided for filing an
  administrative challenge; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - 40% (forty percent) of the penalty applied, if installment payment of the tax credit is arranged within the period provided for filing an administrative
  challenge; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        III - 30% (thirty percent) of the penalty applied, if full payment of the tax credit is made after the period provided for in subsection I of this article and
  before it is entered into active debt; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        IV - 20% (twenty percent) of the penalty applied, if installment payment of the tax credit is arranged after the period provided for in subsection II of this article and before its
  entry into active debt. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        § 1 The reduction percentages provided for in subsections I to IV of the caput of this article shall be, respectively, 60% (sixty percent), 50% (fifty
  percent), 40% (forty percent) and 30% (thirty percent), in the case of taxpayers that: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          I - participate in the National Tax Compliance Program (PNCT) referred to in art. 471-A; or (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          II - have a good tax compliance record, under the terms of the regulation. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        § 2 Termination of the installment plan, motivated by non-compliance with the rules governing it, shall result in reinstatement of the amount of the fine
  proportionally to the value of the tax credit not satisfied. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

                                                                                     TITLE VIII

                                                                    ON THE TRANSITION TO THE IBS AND TO THE CBS

                                                                                     CHAPTER I

                                                             ON THE SETTING OF RATES DURING THE TRANSITION

                                                                                       Section I

                                                              On the Setting of IBS Rates during the Transition

          Art. 342. The transition to the IBS shall meet the criteria established in this Section and in the following provisions:



        I - art. 501 of this Complementary Law, with respect to the reduction of the rates of the tax provided for in art. 155, II, of the Federal Constitution, and the reduction of the
  tax benefits related to this tax between 2029 and 2032;

        II - art. 508 of this Complementary Law, with respect to the reduction of the rates of the tax provided for in art. 156, III, of the Federal Constitution, and the reduction of the
  tax benefits related to this tax between 2029 and 2032;

        III - arts. 361 to 365 of this Complementary Law, with respect to setting the IBS reference rates from 2029 to 2033; and

        IV - arts. 366 and 369 of this Complementary Law, with respect to setting the IBS reference rates in 2034 and 2035.

        Art. 343. With respect to taxable events occurring from January 1 to December 31, 2026, the IBS shall be charged by applying the state rate of
  0.1% (one tenth of one percent).

        Sole paragraph. During the period indicated in the caput of this article, IBS collection shall not observe the earmarking, apportionment and allocation rules provided for in the
  Federal Constitution, and shall instead be applied, fully and successively, to:

        I - the funding of the IBS Management Committee, under the terms of art. 156-B, § 2, III, of the Federal Constitution; and

        II - composing the Fund for Compensation of Tax or Financial-Tax Benefits of the ICMS.

         Art. 344. With respect to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2027 to December 31, 2028, the IBS shall be charged at the state rate of 0.05%
  (five hundredths of one percent) and at the municipal rate of 0.05% (five hundredths of one percent).

        Sole paragraph. The rates provided for in the caput:

        I - shall be applied with the respective reduction in the case of transactions subject to a reduced rate, within differentiated taxation regimes;

        II - shall be applied in relation to the specific regimes covered by this Complementary Law, observing the respective tax bases, except in relation
  to fuels subject to the specific regime covered by arts. 172 to 180 of this Complementary Law; and

        III - in relation to fuels subject to the specific regime covered by arts. 172 to 180 of this Complementary Law, the rates referred to in the caput
  of this article shall be applied to the value of the transaction at the time the CBS is levied.

         IV - shall be considered as IBS reference rates for purposes of the provisions of § 2 of art. 189, § 8 of art. 485, § 13 of art. 486 and § 12 of
  art. 487. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

                                                                                     Section II

                                                             On the Setting of CBS Rates during the Transition

        Art. 345. The transition to the CBS shall meet the criteria established in this Section and in the following provisions:

        I - arts. 353 to 359 of this Complementary Law, with respect to setting the CBS reference rate from 2027 to 2033, observing the provisions of art. 368
  for the period from 2030 to 2033; and

        II - arts. 366 and 369 of this Complementary Law, with respect to setting the CBS reference rate in 2034 and 2035.

        Art. 346. With respect to taxable events occurring from January 1 to December 31, 2026, the CBS shall be charged by applying the rate of 0.9%
  (nine tenths of one percent).

         Art. 347. With respect to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2027 to December 31, 2028, the CBS rate shall be that set under the terms of
  subsection I of the caput and §§ 2 and 3, all of art. 14, reduced by 0.1 (one tenth) percentage point, except in relation to fuels subject to the specific regime
  covered by arts. 172 to 180 of this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The rate reduction provided for in the caput shall be:

        I - proportional to the respective reduction in the case of transactions subject to a reduced rate, within differentiated taxation regimes;

        II - applied in relation to the specific regimes covered by this Complementary Law, observing the respective tax bases.

        § 2 During the period referred to in the caput of this article, the amount of IBS collected under the terms of subsection III of the sole paragraph of art. 344 may be
  deducted from the amount of CBS payable by taxpayers subject to the specific fuel regime covered by arts. 172 to 180 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                    Section III

                                                                Common Provisions for the IBS and the CBS in 2026

        Art. 348. With respect to taxable events occurring from January 1 to December 31, 2026:

          I - the amount collected of the IBS and the CBS shall be offset against the amount owed, in the same assessment period, of the contributions provided for in art. 195, subsection
  I, item "b", and subsection IV, and of the contribution to the PIS referred to in art. 239, both of the Federal Constitution;

        II - if the taxpayer does not have sufficient debts to carry out the offset referred to in subsection I, the amount collected may be:

        a) offset against any other federal tax, under the terms of legislation; or

        b) refunded within up to 60 (sixty) days, upon request;

        III - the IBS and CBS rates provided for in arts. 343 and 346 of this Complementary Law:

        a) shall be applied with the respective reduction in the case of transactions subject to a reduced rate, within differentiated taxation regimes;

        b) shall be applied in relation to the specific regimes covered by this Complementary Law, observing the respective tax bases, except in relation
  to fuels and biofuels covered by arts. 172 to 180;

        c) shall not be applied in relation to the transactions of taxpayers opting for the Simples Nacional.

        § 1 Collection of the IBS and the CBS relating to taxable events occurring in the period indicated in the caput is waived in relation to taxpayers that
  comply with the ancillary obligations provided for in legislation.

          § 2 The taxpayer exempted from collection under § 1 remains obligated to make full payment of the Contributions provided for in art. 195, subsection
  I, item "b", and subsection IV, and of the contribution to the Social Integration Program referred to in art. 239, both of the Federal Constitution.

        § 3 During the period referred to in the caput of this article, if a notice of infraction is issued for non-compliance with the ancillary obligations relating to the
  IBS and the CBS provided for in art. 341-G of this Complementary Law, the taxpayer shall be notified to, within 60 (sixty) days counted from the notice, remedy
  the omission identified by the tax authorities. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       § 4 Compliance with the notice referred to in § 3 of this article extinguishes the penalty imposed on the taxpayer. (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

                                                                                       Section IV

                                                             On the Setting of Reference Rates from 2027 to 2035

                                                                                     Subsection I

                                                                                 General Provisions

        Art. 349. Subject to the calculation method and limits provided for in this Section, a resolution of the Federal Senate shall set:

        I - for the years 2027 to 2033, the CBS reference rate;

        II - for the years 2029 to 2033:

        a) the IBS reference rate for the States;

        b) the IBS reference rate for the Municipalities;

        c) the IBS reference rate for the Federal District, which shall correspond to the sum of the reference rates provided for in items "a" and "b" of this subsection;

        III - for the years 2027 to 2033, the reducer to be applied to the CBS and IBS rates on transactions contracted by direct public administration,
  by autarchies and by public foundations, including their imports.

         § 1 The reference rates and the reducer referred to in subsection III of the caput shall be set in the year prior to the one in which they take effect, based on calculations made
  by the Federal Court of Audit (Tribunal de Contas da União), observing the following:

         I - the Federal Court of Audit shall send the Federal Senate the calculations referred to in this paragraph by September 15 of the year prior to the year in which
  the reference rates and the reducer take effect;

         II - the Federal Senate shall set the reference rates and the reducer by October 31 of the year prior to the year in which they take effect, the provisions of
  art. 150, subsection III, item "c", of the Federal Constitution not applying.

         § 2 If the deadline provided for in subsection II of § 1 extends beyond December 22 of the year prior to the year in which they take effect, while the
  rates have not yet been set by the Federal Senate or taken effect, the reference rates calculated by the Federal Court of Audit shall be used, subject to the following
  conditions:

        I - the rates set by the Federal Senate shall take effect from the beginning of the second month following the one in which they are set;

        II - the provisions of art. 150, subsection III, item "b", of the Federal Constitution shall be observed.

        § 3 The calculations assigned to the Federal Court of Audit under the terms of § 1 shall be carried out based on proposals submitted:

        I - by the Federal Executive Branch, for calculations relating to the CBS reference rate;

        II - by the IBS Management Committee, for calculations relating to the IBS reference rates;

        III - jointly by the Federal Executive Branch and the IBS Management Committee, for the reducer referred to in subsection III of the caput.

        § 4 The Federal Executive Branch and the IBS Management Committee shall act jointly to harmonize the methodology of the calculations referred to in the subsections of §
  3.

        § 5 The proposals referred to in the subsections of § 3:

        I - shall be prepared based on the methodology approved under the terms of § 7;

        II - shall be sent to the Federal Court of Audit by July 31 of the year prior to the year in which the reference rates and the reducer take effect;

        III - shall be accompanied by the data and information necessary for calculating the reference rates and the reducer, which shall be supplemented in
  a timely manner, if so requested by the Federal Court of Audit.

         § 6 If the proposals referred to in the subsections of § 3 are not submitted within the period provided for in subsection II of § 5, the Federal Court of Audit
  shall perform the calculations necessary to set the reference rates and the reducer referred to in subsection III of the caput based on the information to which it has access.

        § 7 The calculation methodology referred to in subsection I of § 5:

         I - shall be prepared by the IBS Management Committee and the Federal Executive Branch, within their respective areas of competence, based on the criteria set forth in
  arts. 350 to 369 of this Complementary Law; and

        II - shall be approved by the Federal Court of Audit.

         § 8 In defining the methodology referred to in § 7, the Federal Executive Branch and the IBS Management Committee may propose adjustments to the criteria set forth in
  arts. 350 to 369 of this Complementary Law, provided such adjustments are justified.

        § 9 In the process of approving the methodology referred to in § 7:

         I - the IBS Management Committee and the Federal Executive Branch shall send the Federal Court of Audit the proposed methodology to be adopted by the
  end of June of the second year prior to the one in which the reference rate calculated based on the methodology to be approved takes effect;

        II - the Federal Court of Audit shall approve the methodology within 180 (one hundred and eighty) days;

          III - the Federal Court of Audit may request adjustments to the methodology from the IBS Management Committee and the Federal Executive Branch, which shall, within
  30 (thirty) days:

        a) implement the adjustments; or

        b) submit to the Federal Court of Audit an alternative to the proposed adjustments.

        § 10. The Federal Court of Audit, and, within their respective areas of competence, the IBS Management Committee and the Federal Executive Branch, may, by mutual
  agreement, implement subsequent adjustments to the approved methodology under the terms of § 9.


        § 11. The federative entities and the IBS Management Committee shall provide the Federal Court of Audit with the information necessary for preparing the calculations
  referred to in this article.

       § 12. The Federal Executive Branch and the IBS Management Committee shall provide the Federal Court of Audit with all the resources necessary for the approval of the
  methodology and for preparing the calculations referred to in this article, by sharing data and information.

         § 13. The sharing of data and information referred to in this article shall observe the provisions of art. 198 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 - National
  Tax Code.

       § 14. In setting the CBS reference rate and the state, district and municipal IBS reference rates, the values calculated under the terms of this
  Section shall be rounded to the nearest tenth of a percentage point, up or down.

                                                                                     Subsection II

                                                                             On Reference Revenue

        Art. 350. In preparing the calculations for setting the reference rates, the following are understood:

        I - Union reference revenue, the sum of revenue, before the offset referred to in subsections I and II of the caput of art. 348 of this Complementary Law:

        a) of the contributions provided for in art. 195, subsection I, item "b", and subsection IV and of the contribution to the PIS referred to in art. 239, all of the Federal Constitution;

        b) of the tax provided for in art. 153, subsection IV, of the Federal Constitution; and

        c) of the tax provided for in art. 153, subsection V, of the Federal Constitution, on insurance transactions;

        II - reference revenue of the States, the sum of the revenue of the States and the Federal District:

        a) from the tax provided for in art. 155, subsection II, of the Federal Constitution;

         b) from the contributions earmarked for funding state funds in operation on April 30, 2023 and established as a condition for
  the application of deferral, a special regime or other differentiated treatment relating to the tax referred to in art. 155, subsection II, of the Federal Constitution;

        III - reference revenue of the Municipalities, the sum of the revenue of the Municipalities and the Federal District from the tax provided for in art. 156, subsection III, of the Federal
  Constitution.

        § 1 For purposes of the provision in this article, the revenue from the taxes referred to in the caput shall be determined so as to include:

        I - revenue obtained under Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006;

        II - revenue obtained under art. 82 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act; and

        III - the total amount collected, including interest and fines, arising from amounts entered or not entered into active debt.

        § 2 The revenue from the contributions referred to in item "b" of subsection II of the caput:

        I - does not include revenue from contributions on primary and semi-processed products replaced by similar contributions, under the terms of art. 136 of the Transitional Constitutional
  Provisions Act;

        II - shall correspond, for each period, to the average value of the contributions effectively collected from 2021 to 2023, adjusted by the variation in revenue from the tax
  referred to in art. 155, subsection II, of the Federal Constitution, of the respective State or Federal District;

        III - shall be calculated according to a methodology to be developed by the IBS Management Committee and approved by the Federal Court of Audit.

        § 3 For purposes of the provision in subsection III of § 2:

       I - the IBS Management Committee shall send the proposed methodology to the Federal Court of Audit by June 31, 2026; and (Revogado pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - the procedures provided for in §§ 9 and 10 of art. 349 shall be observed.

                                                                                     Subsection III

                                                                     On the Calculation of Reference Rates

         Art. 351. Subject to the availability of information, the calculations for setting the reference rate shall consider the IBS and CBS revenue
  broken down between:

        I - revenue from transactions and imports subject to the general incidence rules provided for in Title I of this Book, broken down into:

        a) transactions and imports subject to the standard rate;

        b) transactions and imports subject to a rate reduced by 60% (sixty percent) of the standard rate;

        c) transactions and imports subject to a rate reduced by 30% (thirty percent) of the standard rate;

        II - revenue from transactions and imports taxed on the basis of each of the specific taxation regimes;

        III - revenue from transactions taxed under the Special Unified Regime for the Collection of Taxes and Contributions owed by Micro and Small
  Businesses - Simples Nacional, covered by Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, broken down if necessary for each of the brackets
  of the tables in the annexes to that Complementary Law;

         IV - revenue obtained by each federative sphere in acquisitions of goods and services in which the revenue is allocated entirely to the acquiring federative entity,
  under the terms of art. 473 of this Complementary Law, broken down for each type of transaction and import referred to in subsections I to III of the caput of this article;

        V - the amount of the revenue reduction resulting from:

        a) the granting of presumed credits, broken down for each type of presumed credit provided for in this Complementary Law;

        b) the general refund of IBS and CBS to individuals, referred to in art. 118 of this Complementary Law, broken down for each type of refund;

        VI - other factors that increase or reduce IBS and CBS revenue not considered in the preceding subsections, broken down by category.

        § 1 The revenues referred to in subsections I to III of the caput of this article:


         I - shall not consider transactions contracted by direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations, including their imports, and
  subject to the regime referred to in art. 473 of this Complementary Law;

        II - shall correspond to the value of the IBS and the CBS levied on transactions that do not give rise to a credit right for acquirers.

        § 2 For purposes of setting the reference rate, the value of IBS and CBS revenue referred to in the caput:

        I - shall be determined so as to include:

        a) revenue obtained under Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006;

        b) revenue obtained under art. 82 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act; and

        c) the total amount collected, including interest and fines, arising from amounts entered or not entered into active debt;

        II - shall not include IBS amounts withheld for later offset or reimbursement.

        § 3 Calculations by revenue category or revenue reduction category referred to in the subsections of the caput may be carried out based on the values stated
  in tax documents, and adjusted afterward so that their total value corresponds to that determined under the terms of § 2.

                                                                                    Subsection IV

                                                                  On the Calculation of the CBS Reference Rate

       Art. 352. The calculation of the CBS reference rate for each year of effect from 2027 to 2033 shall be carried out, under the terms of arts. 353 to 359 of this Complementary
  Law, based on:

        I - the Union's reference revenue in prior base years;

        II - an estimate of what CBS revenue would be if, in each of the base years, the reference rate, the rates of the specific regimes
  and the CBS legislation for the year of effect were applied; and

        III - estimates of what the revenue of the Selective Tax and the IPI would be, if, in each of the base years, the rates and legislation of those
  taxes for the year of effect were applied.

         § 1 The estimate of CBS revenue referred to in subsection II of the caput shall be calculated, in base-year values, for each revenue or revenue-reduction category
  referred to in the subsections of the caput of art. 351 of this Complementary Law, by applying the reference rate and the other rates provided for in
  CBS legislation for the year of effect, to an estimate of the tax base in the base year.

         § 2 The estimates of the revenue of the taxes referred to in subsection III of the caput shall be calculated, in base-year values, by applying the rates
  provided for in the legislation of those taxes for the year of effect, to an estimate of the tax base in the base year.

        § 3 Subject to the specific criteria provided for in arts. 353 to 359 of this Complementary Law, the estimate of the tax base of each category referred to
  in §§ 1 and 2 of this article may take as reference, among others:

        I - data obtained in the process of collecting taxes on goods and services in the base year;

        II - public data relating to macroeconomic aggregates in the base year and, in case such specific data is unavailable, data relating to macroeconomic
  aggregates of prior years, adjusted to base-year values by the variation in the value of macroeconomic aggregates or of appropriate price and
  quantity indicators;

         III - the tax base of each CBS revenue category in years after the base year, determined from tax documents and CBS bookkeeping,
  adjusted to base-year values by the variation in the value of macroeconomic aggregates or of price and quantity indicators appropriate to each revenue
  category; or

         IV - the tax base of the taxes referred to in subsection III of the caput in years after the base year, determined from tax documents and
  the bookkeeping of those taxes, adjusted to base-year values by the variation in the value of macroeconomic aggregates or of specific price and
  quantity indicators.

        § 4 In the case of specific (ad rem) rates or amounts fixed in the domestic currency in legislation, the amounts provided for in legislation for the year of
  effect shall be adjusted to base-year values so as to reflect the variation in prices between the two periods.

        Art. 353. The CBS reference rate for 2027 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2024 and 2025:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2027;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2027 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2027 rates.

        § 1 The CBS reference rate for 2027 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the base years referred to in the caput; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

         § 2 For purposes of the provision in subsection III of § 3 of art. 352 of this Complementary Law, in 2026, the deadlines referred to in subsections I and II of § 1 and in subsection II of
  § 5, both of art. 349, shall be extended by 45 (forty-five) days.

        Art. 354. The CBS reference rate for 2028 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2025 and 2026:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2028;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the
  2028 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2028 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2028 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput; and


        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

        Art. 355. The CBS reference rate for 2029 shall be set based on the estimate:

         I - of CBS revenue in 2027, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2029;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in 2027, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2029 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in 2027, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2029 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2029 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in 2027; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

        Art. 356. The CBS reference rate for 2030 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2027 and 2028:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2030;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the
  2030 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2030 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2030 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

        Art. 357. The CBS reference rate for 2031 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2028 and 2029:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2031;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the
  2031 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2031 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2031 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

        Art. 358. The CBS reference rate for 2032 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2029 and 2030:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2032;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the
  2032 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2032 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2032 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

        Art. 359. The CBS reference rate for 2033 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2030 to 2031:

         I - of CBS revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection II of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the reference rate, the
  rates of the specific regimes and the CBS legislation for 2033;

        II - of Selective Tax revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the
  2033 rates; and

        III - of IPI revenue in the base year, calculated under the terms of subsection III of the caput of art. 352 of this Complementary Law based on the 2033 rates.

        Sole paragraph. The CBS reference rate for 2033 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between:

        I - the average of the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in the subsections of the caput and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput; and

        II - the average of the ratio between the Union's reference revenue and GDP in the years 2012 to 2021.

                                                                                  Subsection V

                                                               On the Calculation of IBS Reference Rates

        Art. 360. The calculation of the state and municipal IBS reference rates for each year of effect from 2029 to 2033 shall be carried out, under the terms of arts. 361
  to 365 of this Complementary Law, based on:

        I - the reference revenue of the respective federative sphere in prior base years; and

        II - an estimate of what IBS revenue would be if, in each of the base years, the reference rate, the rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for the year of effect were applied.

         § 1 The estimate of IBS revenue referred to in subsection II of the caput shall be calculated, in base-year values, for each revenue or revenue-reduction category
  referred to in the subsections of the caput of art. 351 of this Complementary Law, by applying the reference rate and the other rates provided for in
  IBS legislation for the year of effect, to an estimate of the tax base in the base year.

         § 2 Subject to the specific criteria provided for in arts. 361 to 365 of this Complementary Law, the estimate of the tax base of each category referred to
  in § 1 of this article may take as reference, among others:

         I - the tax base of each CBS revenue and revenue-reduction category in the base year, adjusted so as to reflect the differences between the
  CBS legislation in the base year and the IBS legislation in the year of effect;

        II - the tax base of each IBS revenue and revenue-reduction category in the base year, adjusted so as to reflect the differences in the
  IBS legislation between the base year and the year of effect.

        § 3 In the case of specific (ad rem) rates or amounts fixed in the domestic currency in legislation, the amounts provided for in legislation for the year of
  effect shall be adjusted to base-year values so as to reflect the variation in prices between the two periods.

        Art. 361. The state and municipal IBS reference rates for 2029 shall be set so that:
        I - the estimate of the state share of IBS revenue in 2027, calculated based on the state reference rate, the state rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for 2029, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 10% of the reference revenue of the States in 2027;
        II - the estimate of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2027, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for 2029, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 10% of the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2027.
        Sole paragraph. In preparing the calculations referred to in this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take as reference:
        I - primarily, CBS revenue in 2027, adjusted so as to reflect differences between the CBS legislation in 2027 and the IBS legislation in 2029;
        II - subsidiarily, IBS revenue in 2027, adjusted so as to reflect differences in IBS legislation between 2027 and 2029, or other sources of
  information.

        Art. 361. The state and municipal IBS reference rates for 2029 shall be set based on the estimate: (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar
  nº 227, de 2026)

         I - of the state share of IBS revenue in 2027, calculated based on the state reference rate, the state rates of the specific regimes
  and the IBS legislation for 2029, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2027, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for 2029, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       III - of the reference revenue of the States for the year 2027 with the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction; (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       IV - of the reference revenue of the Municipalities for the year 2027 with the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction. (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 1 The state IBS reference rate for 2029 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          I - the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in subsections I and III of the caput of this article and GDP in 2027; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the States and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 2 The municipal IBS reference rate for 2029 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          I - the ratio between the sum of the values referred to in subsections II and IV of the caput of this article and GDP in 2027; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the Municipalities and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         § 3 In preparing the calculations of the reference rates provided for in §§ 1 and 2 of this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take
  as reference: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          I - primarily, CBS revenue in 2027, adjusted so as to reflect differences between the CBS legislation in 2027 and the IBS legislation in
  2029; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - subsidiarily, IBS revenue in 2027, adjusted so as to reflect differences in IBS legislation between 2027 and 2029, or other sources of
  information. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         Art. 362. The state and municipal IBS reference rates for 2030 shall be set so that:
         I - the average of the estimate of the state share of IBS revenue in 2027 and in 2028, calculated based on the state reference rate, the
  state rates of the specific regimes and the IBS legislation for 2030, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 20% of the average reference
  revenue of the States in 2027 and in 2028;
         II - the average of the estimate of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2027 and in 2028, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, the
  municipal rates of the specific regimes and the IBS legislation for 2030, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 20% of the average reference
  revenue of the Municipalities in 2027 and in 2028.
        Sole paragraph. In preparing the calculations referred to in this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take as reference:
        I - primarily, CBS revenue in 2027 and 2028, adjusted so as to reflect differences between the CBS legislation in 2027 and in 2028 and the
  IBS legislation in 2030;
        II - subsidiarily, IBS revenue in 2027 and 2028, adjusted so as to reflect differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2030, or other
  sources of information.

          Art. 362. The state and municipal IBS reference rates for 2030 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2027 and
  2028: (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        I - of the state share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the state reference rate, the state rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for 2030, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - of the municipal share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes and the IBS legislation for 2030, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Redação dada pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

       III - of the reference revenue of the States for the years 2027 and 2028 with the effects of the 20% (twenty percent) rate reduction; (Incluído pela Lei
  Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        IV - of the reference revenue of the Municipalities for the years 2027 and 2028 with the effects of the 20% (twenty percent) rate reduction. (Incluído pela
  Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 1 The state IBS reference rate for 2030 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)


          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput of this article between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          a) the sum of the values referred to in subsections I and III of the caput of this article; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          b) GDP; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the States and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          § 2 The municipal IBS reference rate for 2030 shall be set so as to bring about equivalence between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de
  2026)

          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput of this article between: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          a) the sum of the values referred to in subsections II and IV of the caput of this article; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          b) GDP; and (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the Municipalities and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         § 3 In preparing the calculations of the reference rates provided for in §§ 1 and 2 of this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take
  as reference: (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

         I - primarily, CBS revenue in 2027 and 2028, adjusted so as to reflect differences between the CBS legislation in 2027 and in 2028 and the
  IBS legislation in 2030; (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)

        II - subsidiarily, IBS revenue in 2027 and 2028, adjusted so as to reflect differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2030, or other
  sources of information. (Incluído pela Lei Complementar nº 227, de 2026)
         Art. 363. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2031 shall be set so that:
         I - the average of the estimate of the state share of IBS revenue for 2028 and 2029, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the state rates
  of the specific regimes, and on the IBS legislation of 2031, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 30% of the average of:
         a) the reference revenue of the States in 2028;
         b) the reference revenue of the States in 2029, divided by 9 (nine) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
         II - the average of the estimate of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2028 and 2029, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, on the
  municipal rates of the specific regimes, and on the IBS legislation of 2031, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 30% of the average of:
         a) the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2028;
         b) the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2029, divided by 9 (nine) and multiplied by 10 (ten).
         Sole paragraph. In preparing the calculations referred to in this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take as reference:
         I - in 2028:
         a) primarily, the CBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences between the CBS legislation in 2028 and the IBS legislation in 2031;
         b) subsidiarily, the IBS revenue in 2028, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between that year and 2031, or other sources of
  information;
         II - in 2029, primarily the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between that year and 2031 and, subsidiarily,
  other sources of information.

          Art. 363. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2031 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2028 and
  2029:    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - of the state share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the state rates of the specific
  regimes, and on the IBS legislation of 2031, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - of the municipal share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, on the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes, and on the IBS legislation of 2031, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - of the reference revenue of the States: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) for the year 2028, with the effects of the 30% (thirty percent) rate reduction; and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       b) for the year 2029, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the rate reduction
  of 30% (thirty percent); and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          IV - of the reference revenue of the Municipalities:   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) for the year 2028, with the effects of the 30% (thirty percent) rate reduction; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       b) for the year 2029, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the rate reduction
  of 30% (thirty percent). (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 1 The state IBS reference rate for 2031 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput of this article between:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) the sum of the amounts referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article; and   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          b) GDP; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the States and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2 The municipal IBS reference rate for 2031 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput of this article between:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) the sum of the amounts referred to in items II and IV of the caput of this article; and   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          b) GDP; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the Municipalities and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3 In preparing the calculations of the reference rates provided for in §§ 1 and 2 of this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take
  as reference: (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          I - in 2028:    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


         a) primarily, the CBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences between the CBS legislation in 2028 and the IBS legislation in 2031;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) subsidiarily, the IBS revenue in 2028, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between that year and 2031, or other sources of
  information; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - in 2029, primarily the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between that year and 2031, and, subsidiarily,
  other sources of information. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         Art. 364. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2032 shall be set so that:
         I - the average of the estimate of the state share of IBS revenue in 2029 and 2030, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the
  state rates of the specific regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2032, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 40% (forty percent) of the
  average:
         a) of the reference revenue of the States in 2029, divided by 9 (nine) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
         b) of the reference revenue of the States in 2030, divided by 8 (eight) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
         II - the average of the estimate of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2029 and 2030, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, on the
  municipal rates of the specific regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2032, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to 40% (forty percent) of the
  average:
         a) of the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2029, divided by 9 (nine) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
         b) of the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2030, divided by 8 (eight) and multiplied by 10 (ten).
         Sole paragraph. In preparing the calculations referred to in this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take as reference in 2029 and
  2030, primarily, the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2032 and, subsidiarily, other sources
  of information.

       Art. 364. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2032 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2029 and
  2030: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - of the state share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the state rates of the specific
  regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2032, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - of the municipal share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, on the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2032, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          III - of the reference revenue of the States:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       a) for the year 2029, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the rate reduction
  of 40% (forty percent); and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) for the year 2030, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 20% (twenty percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the
  40% (forty percent) rate reduction; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          IV - of the reference revenue of the Municipalities:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       a) for the year 2029, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 10% (ten percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the rate reduction
  of 40% (forty percent); and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) for the year 2030, adjusted so as to exclude the effects of the 20% (twenty percent) rate reduction and to include the effects of the
  40% (forty percent) rate reduction.  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 1 The state IBS reference rate for 2032 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput between:        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) the sum of the amounts referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          b) GDP; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the States and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2 The municipal IBS reference rate for 2032 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

          I - the average of the ratio determined in each of the base years referred to in the caput of this article between:          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          a) the sum of the amounts referred to in items II and IV of the caput of this article; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          b) GDP; and    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the Municipalities and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3 In preparing the calculations of the reference rates provided for in §§ 1 and 2 of this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take
  as reference in 2029 and 2030, primarily, the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2032, and,
  subsidiarily, other sources of information. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 365. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2033 shall be set so that:
        I - the average of the estimate of the state share of IBS revenue in 2030 and 2031, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the
  state rates of the specific regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2033, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to the average of the:
        a) reference revenue of the States in 2030, divided by 8 (eight) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
        b) reference revenue of the States in 2031, divided by 7 (seven) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
        II - the average of the estimate of the municipal share of IBS revenue in 2030 and 2031, calculated based on the municipal reference rate on the
  municipal rates of the specific regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2033, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law, is equivalent to the average:
        a) of the reference revenue of the Municipalities in 2030, divided by 8 (eight) and multiplied by 10 (ten);
        b) of the reference revenue of the municipalities in 2031, divided by 7 (seven) and multiplied by 10 (ten).
        Sole paragraph. In preparing the calculations referred to in this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take as reference in 2030 and in
  2031, primarily the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2033 and, subsidiarily, other sources of
  information.

       Art. 365. The state and municipal reference rates of the IBS for 2033 shall be set based on the estimate, for each of the base years 2030 and
  2031: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - of the state share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the state reference rate, on the state rates of the specific
  regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2033, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


        II - of the municipal share of IBS revenue in the base years, calculated based on the municipal reference rate, on the municipal rates of the specific
  regimes and on the IBS legislation of 2033, under the terms of art. 360 of this Complementary Law. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

           § 1 The state IBS reference rate for 2033 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:            (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

       I - the average of the ratio between the amount referred to in item I of the caput of this article and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput of this article; and             (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

           II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the States and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

           § 2 The municipal IBS reference rate for 2033 shall be set so that there is equivalence between:            (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

       I - the average of the ratio between the amount referred to in item II of the caput of this article and GDP in the base years referred to in the caput of this article; and            (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

           II - the average of the ratio between the reference revenue of the Municipalities and GDP in the years 2024 to 2026.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3 In preparing the calculations of the reference rates provided for in §§ 1 and 2 of this article, the tax base to be used in the estimates shall take
  as reference in 2030 and 2031, primarily, the IBS revenue, adjusted so as to account for differences in IBS legislation between those years and 2033, and,
  subsidiarily, other sources of information. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                     Subsection VI

                                                              On the Setting of Reference Rates in 2034 and 2035

        Art. 366. Subject to the provisions of arts. 19 and 369 of this Complementary Law, the CBS reference rate and the state and municipal reference rates
  of the IBS in 2034 and 2035 shall be those set for 2033.

                                                                                     Subsection VII

                                                             On the Limit for Reference Rates in 2030 and 2035

           Art. 367. For purposes of the provisions of arts. 368 and 369 of this Complementary Law, the following definitions apply:

         I - Union Reference Ceiling: the average revenue in the period from 2012 to 2021, calculated as a proportion of GDP, of the tax provided for in art. 153, item IV, of the
  contributions provided for in art. 195, item I, subitem "b", and item IV, of the contribution to the PIS referred to in art. 239 and of the tax provided for in art. 153, item V, on
  insurance operations, all under the Federal Constitution;

         II - Total Reference Ceiling: the average revenue in the period from 2012 to 2021, calculated as a proportion of GDP, of the taxes provided for in arts. 153, item IV,
  155, item II, and 156, item III, of the contributions provided for in art. 195, item I, subitem "b", and item IV, of the contribution to the PIS referred to in art. 239 and of the tax
  provided for in art. 153, item V, on insurance operations, all under the Federal Constitution;

           III - Base Revenue of the Union: the revenue of the Union from the CBS and the Selective Tax, calculated as a proportion of GDP;

         IV - Base Revenue of the Subnational Entities: the revenue of the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities from the IBS, deducted of the share referred to in subitem
  "b" of item II of the caput of art. 350 of this Complementary Law, calculated as a proportion of GDP;

           V - Total Base Revenue: the sum of the Base Revenue of the Union with the Base Revenue of the Subnational Entities, the latter being:

           a) multiplied by 10 (ten) in 2029;

           b) multiplied by 5 (five) in 2030;

           c) multiplied by 10 (ten) and divided by 3 (three) in 2031;

           d) multiplied by 10 (ten) and divided by 4 (four) in 2032;

           e) multiplied by 1 (one) in 2033.

           Art. 368. The CBS reference rate in 2030 shall be reduced if the average of the Base Revenue of the Union in 2027 and 2028 exceeds the Union
  Reference Ceiling.

           § 1 The reduction referred to in this article, if any:

           I - shall be defined so that, after its application, the average of the Base Revenue of the Union in 2027 and 2028 equals the Union Reference Ceiling;

           II - shall be set in percentage points;

           III - shall be applied to the Union's reference rate, calculated in the manner set forth in arts. 356 to 359 of this Complementary Law, for the years 2030 to 2033.

        § 2 The amount of the reduction referred to in this article shall be set by the Federal Senate at the time of setting the CBS reference rate for the years
  2030 to 2033, in accordance with the criteria established in art. 349 of this Complementary Law.

           § 3 The revision of the CBS reference rate in accordance with this article shall not entail the collection of or refund of CBS relating to prior years.

        Art. 369. The CBS and IBS reference rates in 2035 shall be reduced if the average Total Base Revenue between 2029 and 2033 exceeds the Total Reference
  Ceiling.

           § 1 The reduction referred to in this article, if any:

           I - shall be defined so that, after its application, the average Total Base Revenue between 2029 and 2033 equals the Total Reference Ceiling;

           II - shall be set in percentage points;

           III - shall be distributed proportionally among the CBS reference rate, and the state and municipal reference rates of the IBS.

         § 2 The amount of the reduction referred to in this article shall be set by the Federal Senate for the year 2035, in accordance with the criteria and deadlines established in
  art. 349 of this Complementary Law.

         § 3 The revision of the CBS and IBS reference rate in accordance with this article shall not entail the collection of or refund of any tax relating to prior years or
  transfer of funds between the federative entities.

                                                                                       Section V
                On the Reducer to be applied to the CBS and IBS Rates on Transactions Contracted by the Public Administration from 2027 to 2033

         Art. 370. The calculation of the reducer to be applied, in each year of validity, to the CBS and IBS rates on transactions contracted by the direct
  public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations, including their imports, shall take as reference:

        I - estimate of the CBS and IBS revenue on the transactions referred to in the caput for each base year from 2024 to 2026, calculated under the terms of arts. 352 and 360
  of this Complementary Law, considering:

        a) estimate of the tax base of those transactions in each base year; and

        b) the CBS and IBS rates of the year of validity; and

        II - estimate of the Union's revenue from the taxes referred to in the subitems of item I of art. 350 of this Complementary Law on the transactions referred to in the
  caput of this article;

        III - estimate of the revenue of the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities from the taxes referred to in subitem "a" of item II and item III of art. 350
  of this Complementary Law on the transactions referred to in the caput of this article.

        § 1 For the year of validity 2027, the reducer referred to in the caput shall be set so that there is equivalence between:

       I - the average of the estimate of the CBS revenue for the base years 2024 and 2025, calculated under the terms of item I of the caput, applying to the CBS rates
  the reducer to be applied in 2027; and

        II - the average of the estimate of the Union's revenue for the base years 2024 and 2025, calculated under the terms of item II of the caput.

        § 2 For the year of validity 2028, the reducer referred to in the caput shall be set so that there is equivalence between:

       I - the average of the estimate of the CBS revenue for the base years 2024 to 2026, calculated under the terms of item I of the caput, applying to the CBS rates
  the reducer to be applied in 2028; and

        II - the average of the estimate of the Union's revenue for the base years 2024 to 2026, calculated under the terms of item II of the caput.

        § 3 For the year of validity 2033, the reducer referred to in the caput shall be set so that there is equivalence between:

         I - the average of the estimate of the CBS and IBS revenue for the base years 2024 to 2026, calculated under the terms of item I of the caput, applying to the
  CBS and IBS rates the reducer to be applied in 2033; and

         II - the average of the estimate of the revenue of the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities for the base years 2024 to 2026, calculated under the terms of
  items II and III of the caput.

        § 4 For the years of validity 2029 to 2032, the reducer referred to in the caput shall be set based on a weighted average of the calculations made in the manner
  established in §§ 2 and 3 of this article, considering the evolution of the CBS and IBS rates.

                                                                                   CHAPTER II

                                                    ON THE LIMIT FOR REDUCTION OF IBS RATES FROM 2029 TO 2077

        Art. 371. From 2029 to 2077 it is forbidden for the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities to set IBS rates lower than those necessary to guarantee the retentions
  referred to in § 1 of art. 131 and art. 132, both of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act of the Federal Constitution.

        § 1 For purposes of the provisions of the caput of this article, the IBS rates set by the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities may not be lower
  than the amount resulting from the application of the percentages established for each year in Annex XVI, to the reference rate of the respective federative sphere.

        § 2 In the event that the entity sets a rate at a level lower than that provided for in § 1, the lower rate limit calculated under the terms of § 1
  of this article shall prevail.

                                                                                   CHAPTER III

                                                DA TRANSITION APPLICABLE TO THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT REGIME

       Art. 372. The regime of full allocation of the proceeds of the collection of the IBS and the CBS to the contracting federative entity under the terms of art. 473 of this
  Complementary Law:

        I - does not apply:

        a) to the IBS and the CBS, in relation to taxable events occurring from January 1 to December 31, 2026;

        b) to the CBS, in relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2027 to December 31, 2028;

        II - applies in full:

        a) to the IBS, in relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2027 onward;

        b) to the CBS, in relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2033 onward.

        Sole paragraph. In relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2029 to December 31, 2032, the application of the regime referred to in the caput shall
  occur in the following proportions of the CBS levied on the acquisition of goods and services by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations:

        I - from January 1 to December 31, 2029, 10% (ten percent);

        II - from January 1 to December 31, 2030, 20% (twenty percent);

        III - from January 1 to December 31, 2031, 30% (thirty percent);

        IV - from January 1 to December 31, 2032, 40% (forty percent).

                                                                                   CHAPTER IV

                                                           ON THE REBALANCING OF ADMINISTRATIVE CONTRACTS

        Art. 373. This Chapter provides for the adjustment instruments for contracts entered into prior to the entry into force of this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The provisions of this Chapter apply, as applicable, to administrative contracts entered into after the entry into force of this Complementary Law whose proposal
  was submitted before its entry into force.


          § 2 The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to private contracts, which remain subject to the provisions of the specific legislation.

         Art. 374. Contracts in force at the entry into force of this Complementary Law entered into by the direct or indirect public administration of the Union, the States,
  the Federal District and the Municipalities, including public concessions, shall be adjusted to ensure the restoration of the economic-financial balance due to
  the change in the effective tax burden borne by the contracted party as a result of the impact of the introduction of the IBS and the CBS, in cases in which the imbalance is
  proven.

          § 1 For the purposes of this Chapter, the determination of the effective tax burden borne by the contracted party must consider, including:

        a) the effects of non-cumulativity on the acquisitions and costs incurred by the contracted party, considering the rules for the assessment of credits, and the manner of
  determining the tax base of the taxes referred to in the caput;

          b) the possibility of passing on to third parties, by the contracted party, the financial burden of the taxes referred to in the caput;

          c) the impacts arising from the change of the taxes during the transition period provided for in arts. 125 to 133 of the ADCT; and

          d) the tax or financial benefits or incentives of the contracted party related to the taxes extinguished by Constitutional Amendment No. 132 of December 20,
  2023.

        § 2 The provisions of this Chapter also apply to those contracts that already have a provision in the risk matrix that supervening tax impacts are
  the responsibility of the contracted party.

         Art. 375. The public administration shall carry out, on its own initiative, a review to restore the economic-financial balance when a reduction in the
  effective tax burden borne by the contracted party is found, under the terms of art. 374 of this Complementary Law, with the latter's right to be heard assured.

        Art. 376. The contracted party may seek the restoration of the economic-financial balance referred to in art. 374 of this Complementary Law found in the
  transition period referred to in arts. 125 to 133 of the ADCT by means of a specific and exclusive administrative procedure, under the following terms:

          I - the request for restoration of the economic-financial balance may be made:

          a) at each new tax change that causes a proven imbalance; or

          b) so as to already cover all the changes provided for the period referred to in arts. 342 to 347 of this Complementary Law;

          II - the request for restoration of the economic-financial balance must be made during the term of the contract and before any extension;

          III - the procedure referred to in the caput must proceed on a priority basis;

          IV - the request must be accompanied by a calculation and other elements proving the actual economic-financial imbalance, subject to the provisions of § 3;

          V - the rebalancing may be carried out by means of:

          a) revision of the contracted amounts;

        b) financial compensation, tariff adjustments or other amounts contractually owed to the contracted party, including as capital contribution or
  pecuniary consideration;

          c) renegotiation of terms and conditions for the delivery or provision of services;

          d) increase or reduction of amounts owed to the public administration, including grant rights;

          e) transfer to one of the parties of costs or charges originally attributed to the other; or

          f) other methods deemed acceptable by the parties, subject to the sector legislation or that governing the contract.

         § 1 The request referred to in the caput must be decided definitively within 90 (ninety) days counted from the filing, extendable once for an
  equal period if additional evidentiary instruction is necessary, with said period suspended while the request to the contracted party remains unfulfilled.

        § 2 The economic-financial rebalancing shall preferably be implemented by means of a change in the contract's remuneration or a tariff adjustment,
  as the case may be, with alternative forms only being adopted by the Administration with the agreement of the contracted party, subject, in all
  cases, to the terms of the administrative contract.

          § 3 The legal entities that are part of the public administration with authority to decide on economic-financial rebalancing procedures may
  regulate the manner of submitting the request referred to in the caput and the recommended calculation methodologies for demonstrating the imbalance, without prejudice to the
  right of the contracted party to request it in the absence of such regulation.

        § 4 Under the terms of the regulation, the economic-financial rebalancing may, at the discretion of the public administration, be implemented on a provisional basis in
  cases in which the contracted party demonstrates a relevant financial impact on contract performance arising from the change in the effective tax burden, with the
  economic compensation to be reviewed and adjusted upon the definitive decision on the request.

        § 5 The definitive decision referred to in § 4 must state the manner and instruments for the collection or refund of amounts paid short or in excess
  during the application of the provisional adjustment measure.

          Art. 377. In cases of omission by this Chapter, the provisions of the legislation governing the contract shall apply subsidiarily.

                                                                                      CHAPTER V

                                                             ON THE USE OF THE CREDIT BALANCE OF PIS AND COFINS

         Art. 378. The credits of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and of COFINS, including presumed credits, not appropriated or not used up to the date of extinction of these
  contributions:

          I - shall remain valid and usable in the manner set forth in this Chapter, with the running of the period for their use maintained;

          II - must be duly recorded in the bookkeeping environment for the taxes mentioned in the caput, under the terms of the applicable legislation;

          III - may be used for offsetting against the amount owed of the CBS; and

        IV - may be refunded in cash or offset against other federal taxes, provided that the requirements for use in those modalities established by the legislation of the
  contributions referred to in the caput as of the date of their extinction are met, subject to, on the date of the request or the declaration, the conditions and limits
  in force for the refund or offsetting of credits relating to taxes administered by the RFB.

        Art. 379. Goods received in return as of January 1, 2027, relating to sales made prior to that date, shall entitle the appropriation of a CBS credit
  corresponding to the amount of the contributions referred to in the caput of art. 378 that had been levied on the respective transactions.


        Sole paragraph. The credit referred to in the caput may only be used for offsetting against the CBS, offsetting against other taxes and refund being forbidden.

        Art. 380. The credits of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and of COFINS, which, up to the date of extinction of those taxes, were being appropriated based on
  depreciation, amortization or a monthly amount quota, must remain being appropriated, as presumed credits of the CBS, in the manner provided for:

        I - in item III of § 1 and in § 21 of art. 3 of Law No. 10,637, of December 30, 2002;

        II - in item III of § 1 and in §§ 14, 16 and 29, all of art. 3, and in item II of the caput of art. 15, all of Law No. 10,833, of December 29, 2003;

        III - in §§ 4 and 7 of art. 15 of Law No. 10,865, of April 30, 2004; and

        IV - in art. 6 of Law No. 11,488, of June 15, 2007.

        § 1 The provisions of the caput also apply to credits that are awaiting the fulfillment of requirements to begin appropriation based on
  depreciation, amortization or monthly amount quota on the day immediately prior to the date of extinction of the taxes.

         § 2 The appropriation of the credit referred to in the caput is subject to the legislation in force on the date of extinction of the said taxes, including with respect to
  the rate applicable in calculating its amount, subject to the provisions of art. 378 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3 In the event of disposal of the asset that gives rise to the installment appropriation of credits referred to in the caput before the appropriation is complete, no
  crediting shall be allowed, as of the date of the disposal, with respect to the installments not yet appropriated.

        Art. 381. The taxpayer subject to the regular CBS regime may appropriate a presumed credit on the inventory of material goods existing on January 1,
  2027, in the following situations:

        I - if the taxpayer, on December 31, 2026, was subject to the cumulative assessment regime of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and COFINS,
  established primarily by Law No. 9,718, of November 27, 1998, in relation to goods in inventory on which no credits of the
  Contribution to PIS/Pasep and COFINS were assessed due to being subject to said assessment regime;

        II - in relation to goods in inventory subject, upon acquisition, to tax substitution or single-phase levy referred to in the following provisions:

        a) item I of art. 1 of Law No. 10,147, of December 21, 2000;

        b) caput of art. 1, item II of art. 3 and caput of art. 5 of Law No. 10,485, of July 3, 2002;

        c) art. 43 of Provisional Measure No. 2,158-35, of August 24, 2001;

        d) art. 53 of Law No. 9,532, of December 10, 1997; and

        e) item II of art. 6 of Law No. 12,402, of May 2, 2011;

        III - in relation to the portion of the value of the goods in inventory subject to the partial crediting prohibition established by §§ 7 to 9 of art. 3 of Law No. 10,637, of
  December 30, 2002, and of Law No. 10,833, of December 29, 2003.

        § 1 The right to the presumed credit provided for in the caput:

        I - applies only to new goods acquired from a legal entity domiciled in the Country or imported for resale or for use in the production of goods
  intended for sale or in the provision of services to third parties;

        II - does not apply to products whose acquisition was covered by a zero rate, exemption, suspension, or that were not subject to the levy of the Contribution to
  PIS/Pasep and COFINS;

        III - does not apply to goods considered for personal use and consumption referred to in art. 57 of this Complementary Law;

        IV - does not apply:

        a) to goods incorporated into the taxpayer's fixed assets; and

        b) to real property.

        § 2 An act of the Union's Executive Branch shall regulate the manner of verification of the inventory existing on January 1, 2027, and may determine the conducting
  of an inventory count and valuation, or an alternative method.

        § 3 The amount of the presumed credit referred to in the caput:

         I - in the case of goods acquired domestically, shall be calculated by applying a percentage of 9.25% (nine and twenty-five hundredths percent) to the
  value of the inventory;

        II - in the case of imported goods, shall be equivalent to the amount of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep-Importação and of Cofins-Importação effectively paid on the
  import, with the assessment of a presumed credit in relation to the additional rate referred to in § 21 of art. 8 of Law No. 10,865, of April 30, 2004, being forbidden.

        § 4 The presumed credit referred to in the caput:

        I - must be assessed and appropriated by the last day of June 2027;

        II - must be used in 12 (twelve) equal and successive monthly installments starting from the period following that of appropriation; and

        III - may only be used for offsetting against the CBS, offsetting against other taxes and refund being forbidden.

       § 5 For the purposes of this article, goods with the same nature that, as a result of applicable accounting standards, are recorded by public service
  concessionaires as contract, intangible or financial assets shall also be considered goods incorporated into fixed assets.

          Art. 382. The use of the credits of the contributions referred to in this Chapter for offsetting shall take preference over the CBS credits referred to in
  art. 53 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 383. The right to use the credits referred to in arts. 379 to 381 of this Complementary Law shall be extinguished after a period of 5 (five) years, counted
  from the last day of the assessment period in which the appropriation of the credit occurred.

                                                                                      CHAPTER VI

             ON THE CRITERIA, LIMITS AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO THE OFFSETTING OF ICMS TAX OR FINANCIAL-TAX BENEFITS

                                                                                         Section I


                                                                                 General Provisions

         Art. 384. Individuals or legal entities holding onerous benefits relating to the ICMS, due to the reduction in the level of those benefits provided for in § 1
  of art. 128 of the ADCT, in the period between January 1, 2029 and December 31, 2032, shall be compensated with funds from the Fund for Compensation of Tax
  or Financial-Tax Benefits established by art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, in accordance with the criteria and limits for determining
  the level of benefits and their reduction and with the procedures for analyzing the requirements for the applicant's qualification for compensation established in this Complementary
  Law.

         Art. 384. Individuals or legal entities holding onerous benefits relating to the ICMS, due to the reduction in the level of those benefits arising from the
  provisions of art. 128 of the ADCT, in the period between January 1, 2029 and December 31, 2032, shall be compensated with funds from the Fund for Compensation
  of Tax or Financial-Tax Benefits established by art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, in accordance with the criteria and
  limits for determining the level of benefits and their reduction and with the procedures for analyzing the requirements for the applicant's qualification for compensation
  established in this Complementary Law. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Sole paragraph. The compensation referred to in the caput:

        I - applies to holders of onerous benefits regularly granted up to May 31, 2023, without prejudice to subsequent extensions or renewals,
  subject to the deadline of December 31, 2032 and, if applicable, the registration and deposit requirement established by art. 3, item II, of Complementary Law No. 160, of
  August 7, 2017, who timely complied with the conditions required by the norm granting the benefit;

        II - also applies to other programs or benefits that migrated by virtue of changes in state legislation between May 31, 2023 and the date of
  enactment of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, or that were in the process of migration on the date of enactment of said Constitutional
  Amendment, provided that their granting act is issued by the federated unit within 90 (ninety) days after the publication of this Complementary Law;

        III - does not apply to holders of benefits arising from the provisions of § 2-A of art. 3 of Complementary Law No. 160, of August 7, 2017.

       IV - shall adopt as a parameter for calculating the reduction in the level of tax or financial-tax benefits the legislation in force on May 31, 2023, or,
  where applicable, on the date on which the benefits that migrated under the terms of item II of this paragraph began to take effect.              (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 385. For the purposes of the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, the following are considered:

        I - onerous benefits: the economic repercussions arising from exemptions, incentives and tax or financial-tax benefits granted by the
  federated unit for a fixed term and subject to condition, in the manner provided for in art. 178 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 - National Tax Code;

        II - holders of onerous benefits: persons who hold the right to enjoy onerous benefits by virtue of a granting act or norm, provided they are
  compliant with the conditions required by the norm granting the benefit, subject to the provisions of item III of the sole paragraph of art. 384 of this Complementary
  Law;

        III - fixed term: the term established for obtaining the onerous benefit, subject to the deadline of December 31, 2032, under the terms of the caput of art.
  12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023;

         IV - condition, in the manner provided for in art. 178 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 - National Tax Code: the counterparts provided for in the granting act or
  established in state or district legislation required of the benefit holder from which onus or restrictions on its activity result, such as those that:

        a) are aimed at the implementation or expansion of an economic enterprise linked to processes of transformation or industrialization capable of
  adding value;

        b) establish the creation of new jobs; or

        c) impose a limitation on the sale price or the restriction on contracting with certain suppliers;

        V - economic repercussion:

       a) the portion of the ICMS levied on the transaction appropriated by the taxpayer of the tax due to the granting of a tax benefit by the federated unit, such
  as presumed ICMS credit, granted ICMS credit, among others;

         b) the portion corresponding to the discount granted on the ICMS to be collected due to the early payment of the tax whose payment term
  had been extended; or

         c) in the case of the benefit of extending the ICMS payment term, the unrealized financial gain resulting from the reduction of the ICMS rates
  provided for in art. 128 of the ADCT, using as calculation parameters, among others, the Selic Rate accumulated between the month following the ordinary due date of the ICMS
  debt and the month to which the payment was deferred, limited to December 2032;

          VI - granting act of onerous benefits: any administrative act or classification under a legal norm by which the granting of the
  ownership of onerous benefits to an individual or legal entity by the federated unit is effected;

        VII - implementation of an economic enterprise: the establishment of an economic enterprise for the development of the activity to be carried out
  by a legal entity not domiciled in the geographic location of the federated unit that grants the subsidy;

         VIII - expansion of an economic enterprise: the expansion of capacity, the modernization or the diversification of the trade or production of goods or
  services of the economic enterprise, including by means of establishing another unit, by the legal entity domiciled in the geographic location of the
  federated unit that grants the subsidy.

        § 1 For the purposes of the provisions of item IV of the caput, the counterparts provided for in acts or norms granting
  tax benefits that:

        I - amount to the mere fulfillment of duties of mandatory observance for all taxpayers and already previously established in legislation;

        II - constitute a mere declaration of intentions, without the establishment of any actual onus or restrictions; and

        III - require a contribution to a state or district fund linked to the enjoyment of the benefit,

  do not fall within the concept of condition.

         § 2 For the purposes of the compensation referred to in this Chapter, and without applying the provisions of item III of § 1 of this article, a benefit whose
  counterpart is a contribution to a state or district fund whose entire resources are used in public infrastructure works or in
  projects that promote the economic activity of the private sector, including when carried out by state-owned companies, established up to May 31, 2023, is
  considered an onerous benefit.

        § 3 For the calculation of the economic repercussion arising from a tax or financial-tax benefit, all amounts of a tax nature
  corresponding to waived rights and assumed obligations must be deducted, such as ICMS bookkeeping credits that ceased to be used or contributions to funds
  made for the enjoyment of the benefit, including in the case of § 2 of this article.

       § 4 The costs, expenses and investments made as a condition for the enjoyment of onerous benefits shall not be taken into account for the calculation of the economic
  repercussion arising from a tax or financial-tax benefit.



        § 5 The RFB may list other cases with economic repercussions arising from tax or financial-tax benefits relating to the ICMS
  equivalent to those provided for in item V of the caput.

                                                                                        Section II

                                                                          On the Powers Assigned to the RFB

        Art. 386. In relation to the compensation of onerous benefits referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, the RFB is responsible, in observance of this
  Complementary Law, for:

          I - establishing the manner and the information for qualification requests;

          II - issuing complementary norms relating to compliance with the requirements to which applicants are subject for their qualification;

          III - analyzing the qualification requests made by the holders of onerous benefits and, if the legal requirements are met, granting them;

          IV - establishing the information to be provided in the fiscal and tax bookkeeping and the format of the credit assessment demonstration;

         V - processing and reviewing the credit assessments transmitted by the qualified holders of onerous benefits before the body and, if no
  irregularity is found, recognizing the respective credits, authorizing their payment;

          VI - establishing risk parameters for the purpose of automating the recognition of the credit and the authorization of payment;

          VII - establishing analysis criteria to be applied in the review procedures;

          VIII - regulating the manner of rectification of the information provided and the treatment of its consequences;

       IX - regulating the manner of returning improper payment due to an irregularly assessed credit and the withholding of subsequent credits to
  offset improper payments;

          X - regulating the standardization of the representation per federated unit referred to in art. 398 of this Complementary Law;

          XI - regulating deadlines not provided for in this Chapter;

          XII - regulating other procedural aspects not provided for above, especially those concerning the guarantee of the right to a full defense and to adversarial proceedings.

          Sole paragraph. For the purposes of this Chapter, the regulation of the administrative process provided for in Law No. 9,784, of January 29,
  1999, applies subsidiarily.

         Art. 387. Within the scope of the RFB's authority and on an exclusive basis, the Tax Auditor of the Brazilian Federal Revenue Service is responsible, in relation to the right assured
  to holders of onerous benefits to the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, for:

        I - preparing and rendering decisions or participating therein in a process or procedure for analyzing the recognition of the right to the compensation referred to in the caput and of the
  recognition of the credit arising therefrom;

         II - examining the accounting and fiscal bookkeeping of business companies and of business persons for the purpose of reviewing the assessment of the credit
  submitted, without the restrictions provided for in arts. 1,190 and 1,191 of Law No. 10,406, of January 10, 2002 - Civil Code applying to them, and subject to the provisions
  of art. 1,193 of the same statute;

          III - providing guidance to the holders of the right to the compensation referred to in the caput; and

          IV - carrying out the assessment of the credit arising from amounts unduly paid generated by the systematization of the compensation referred to in the caput.

                                                                                        Section III

                                                                    On the Qualification of the Applicant for Compensation

         Art. 388. The holder of an onerous benefit qualified by the RFB may be a beneficiary of the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, except for the
  onerous benefit that, under the terms of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, is covered by the compensation provided for in §§ 2 and 6, all of
  art. 92-B of the ADCT, or, still, by any other form of compensation provided for in the Federal Constitution, even if partial.

         Sole paragraph. The request for the qualification procedure, in the manner to be regulated by the RFB, must be submitted in the period from January
  1, 2026 to December 31, 2028.

          Art. 389. The requirements for granting the qualification to the applicant are:

          I - being the holder of an onerous benefit granted by a federated unit;

          II - there being a granting act of the onerous benefit issued by the federated unit:

          a) up to May 31, 2023, or within the period provided for in the case set forth in item II of the sole paragraph of art. 384 of this Complementary Law, without prejudice to
  subsequent extensions or renewals, as provided for in § 1 of that same article;

          b) that expressly establishes the conditions and counterparts to be observed by the beneficiary;

          c) whose term of enjoyment does not exceed December 31, 2032; and

        d) that is in force in all or part of the period referred to in the caput of art. 384 of this Complementary Law, even by means of an act of extension or
  renewal;

          III - the registration and deposit provided for in item II of art. 3 of Complementary Law No. 160, of August 7, 2017, having been carried out, if such requirement applies;

          IV - timely complying with the conditions required by the granting act of the onerous benefit;

        V - submitting the ancillary obligations with the information necessary to verify the onerous benefit subject to compensation, as well as those in
  which the registration of the benefit itself is recorded, where applicable;

          VI - there being no legal impediment to the enjoyment of tax benefits;

          VII - presenting registration compliance before the national register of legal entities - CNPJ.

        Sole paragraph. For purposes of fulfilling the qualification requirement provided for in item IV of this article, the holder of the onerous benefit must
  submit a declaration that it timely complies with the conditions, with the prior statement of the granting federated unit to the granting of the qualification being mandatory.

          Art. 390. Subject to the right to a full defense and to adversarial proceedings, the qualification shall be:
        I - denied, in the event that the applicant does not meet the requirements referred to in art. 389 of this Complementary Law;

        II - suspended, in the event that the applicant temporarily fails to meet the requirements referred to in art. 389 of this Complementary Law;

        III - cancelled, in the event that the applicant fails to meet the requirements referred to in art. 389 of this Complementary Law.

          Sole paragraph. The suspension provided for in item II of the caput shall be reversed in the event of a change in the elements that led to the suspension, with the same
  previously granted qualification being maintained.

                                                                                        Section IV

                                Da Demonstration and Recognition of the Assessed Credit and of the Review of the Regularity of the Withheld Credit

       Art. 391. The qualified holder of an onerous benefit shall report monthly, in the fiscal bookkeeping, the elements necessary for the quantification of the economic
  repercussion of each tax or financial-tax benefit, in accordance with the regulation to be issued by the RFB.

          § 1 The credit shall be calculated for each competency month based on the amount of the economic repercussion of each tax or financial-tax benefit and of the
  reduction in the level of tax benefits referred to in the caput of art. 384 of this Complementary Law with respect to each granting act and type of qualified tax
  benefit.

        § 2 The assessment of the credit relating to the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law shall be shown in the fiscal bookkeeping, in accordance with the
  RFB's regulation.

        § 3 The right to seek the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law shall be extinguished with the passage of a period of 3 (three) years, counted
  from the expiration of the deadline for transmitting the fiscal bookkeeping established in the regulatory norm to contain the assessment of the corresponding credit.

         Art. 392. The RFB shall process the amount calculated for purposes of compensation, in the manner set forth in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, and, unless there are indications of
  irregularity or the amount falls within risk parameters, shall have its credit automatically recognized and authorized for payment within 60 (sixty) days
  from the expiration of the deadline for transmitting the fiscal bookkeeping containing its demonstration.
         Art. 392. The RFB shall process the amount calculated for offsetting purposes, pursuant to art. 384 of this Complementary Law, and, unless there are indications
  of irregularity or the amount falls within risk parameters, the respective credit shall be automatically recognized and authorized for payment within 60
  (sixty) days counted: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - from the expiration of the deadline for submission of the tax bookkeeping record containing its computation;           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - from the date of submission, if made late; or       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - from the date of the correction made after expiration of the deadline for submission.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 1 If the RFB does not respond within the deadline set forth in the caput, recognition of the credit and authorization of payment shall be tacitly deemed to occur on the
  final date of the deadline.

        § 2 Delivery of the funds to the beneficiary shall occur within 30 (thirty) days counted from the date of the authorization referred to in the caput.

       § 3 Payment made on a date later than that set forth in § 2 shall be increased by interest, at the SELIC Rate for federal securities, accrued monthly, and by interest of
  1% (one percent) in the month in which the amount is made available to the taxpayer, starting from the month following the end of the deadline set forth in that paragraph.

        § 4 If the monthly amount computed is at a level above the tolerable risk threshold, the excess portion shall be withheld for review of the
  regularity of the computation.

        § 5 If there are indications of irregularity, the entire amount computed shall be withheld for its review.

        § 6 Withholdings made under the circumstances described in §§ 4 and 5 of this article must be notified to the interested party.

        § 7 Interest accrues on the withholdings referred to in §§ 4 and 5, at the same rate established in § 3, starting from the month following the end of the 90
  (ninety)-day period counted from the expiration of the deadline for submission of the tax bookkeeping record containing its computation.

       § 8 Review of the regularity of the computation of withheld credits must be carried out within the following maximum periods counted from the date of full
  submission of the supporting evidence required by the RFB on the date of notice described in § 6 of this article:

        I - 120 (one hundred and twenty) days, in the circumstance provided for in § 4 of this article; and

        II - 1 (one) year, in the circumstance provided for in § 5 of this article.

        § 9 Failure to fully submit the supporting evidence referred to in § 8 of this article within 60 (sixty) days counted from notice
  of the request for submission shall result in non-recognition of the withheld portion of the credit, without prejudice to the examination of the regularity of the portion of the credit
  already paid, if any.

       § 10. If the deadline established in § 8 of this article expires without the computation review having been completed, the withheld credit shall be tacitly authorized
  for payment, which must be made within the period provided for in § 2 of this article, without prejudice to the continuation of the ongoing procedure, if applicable.

        § 11. The criteria for defining the tolerable risk threshold may not result in the withholding of amounts referring to more than 20% (twenty percent) of the
  computations submitted in the respective monthly period, not counting toward this computation the computations regarding which there are objective indications of irregularity or
  well-founded suspicions of fraud.

         § 12. The withholding-limiting percentage set forth in § 11 of this article may be expanded during the period in which the total amount of credits computed indicates
  that the resources originally earmarked to fund the Fund established by the caput of art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 23, 2023, will be
  insufficient to cover the offsets referred to in the caput of art. 384 of this Complementary Law until the end of the year 2032, and provided that the indicative criterion is
  regulated and published by the National Treasury Secretariat.

                                                                                        Section V

                                                               Of the Self-Regularization of Information Provided

        Art. 393. If the interested party finds an irregularity in the computation of the credit submitted for payment, it must immediately proceed to
  correct it, amending the information provided in the tax bookkeeping record, in accordance with the regulation to be issued by the RFB.

        § 1 Having received undue amounts arising from the credit computed in excess in the circumstance described in the caput, the beneficiary must also make its immediate
  return to the Fund referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, subject to § 2 of this article and in the manner to be regulated by the RFB.

        § 2 The amount unduly received must be increased by interest from the first day of the month following the date of its receipt, equivalent to the
  SELIC Rate, accrued monthly, and by interest of 1% (one percent) in the month in which the amount is returned to the Fund referred to in art. 12 of Constitutional
  Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023.


         § 3 If the interested party carries out the regularization referred to in the caput and does not make the immediate full return of the amount unduly received referred to
  in § 1 of this article, the RFB is authorized to ex officio offset the debt against credits of the same nature submitted in subsequent periods until
  they are sufficient to equal the amount of the debt updated pursuant to § 2, without prejudice to the ordinary withholdings relating to the review of the regularity of the
  computation of credits subsequently submitted.

            § 4 The interested party must be notified of the ex officio offsets made in accordance with the provisions of § 3 of this article.

            § 5 The RFB shall be responsible for establishing the credit of the Union pursuant to art. 395, if, before the full return of the debt referred to in § 1 of this article:

        I - the interested party does not submit the computation of credits of the same nature eligible for offsetting in the first period following the
  circumstance described in § 3 of this article; or

            II - for any reason, the credits of the same nature eligible for offsetting cease for three consecutive months; or

            III - one year has elapsed since the first offset authorized in § 3 of this article.

         § 6 The correction of the information provided in the tax bookkeeping record referred to in the caput that imposes on the interested party the immediate duty to return
  amounts unduly received, as provided for in § 1 of this article, constitutes the day of occurrence of the undue receipt referred to in § 1 of art. 395, for purposes of
  fixing the initial term of the statute-of-limitations period with respect to the amount arising from the correction.

                                                                                        Section VI

                                                   Of the Procedures for Review of the Credit Computation and the Procedural Rite

         Art. 394. If an irregularity is found in a procedure for review of the computation of the credit submitted for payment, the competent authority
  shall issue a decision order that shall be notified to the interested party with the grounds and evidence necessary, denying the credit
  submitted in whole or in part.

         § 1 The procedural rite provided for in Law No. 9,784, of January 29, 1999, applies to the provisions of the caput, subject to the specific rules established in this
  chapter.

        § 2 The procedure for review of the computation of the credit may also be carried out after payment to the beneficiary, in accordance with procedural rules
  to be established by an act of the RFB.

        § 3 In the course of the computation review procedure, the competent authority shall carry out investigative activities aimed at ascertaining and verifying the
  necessary data, including carrying out inquiries, if applicable.

         § 4 If payment of amounts has occurred for which a decision order is subsequently issued denying the credit submitted in whole or in part, the
  interested party shall be notified to return, within 30 (thirty) days, the amounts unduly received, increased by interest calculated pursuant to § 2 of art. 393.

        § 5 As an alternative to the provisions of § 4 of this article, the interested party may authorize the offsetting of regular credits of the same nature to be
  submitted in subsequent periods until they are sufficient to equal the amount of the debt updated pursuant to § 2 of art. 393.

        § 6 The authorization provided for in § 5 of this article constitutes an irrevocable confession of debt eligible for registration in the Union's active debt, should, for any
  reason, the offsetting cease for three consecutive months and the interested party fail to make the return of the full remaining balance.

            § 7 The interested party may file an appeal within 30 (thirty) days counted from notice of the decision order.

         § 8 The appeal filed does not prevent the establishment of any credit of the Union referred to in art. 395 of this Complementary Law, including the applicable fine,
  but its enforceability shall be suspended until 30 (thirty) days counted from the interested party's notice of the decision on the appeal, further subject to the provisions of § 7
  of art. 395.

        § 9 If the appeal is decided, in a final and definitive manner, wholly or partly in favor of the interested party, and there being an amount owed to it, in accordance with the
  decision rendered, payment of the withheld amount must be authorized.

        § 10. After the appeal is decided, if the denial in whole or in part of the credit submitted for payment is upheld in final administrative form and it has
  already been made, the interested party shall be notified to make the return of the undue payment increased by interest calculated pursuant to § 2 of art. 393 within
  30 days counted from notice of the decision, under its terms.

                                                                                        Section VII

                                                                         Of the Establishment of the Union's Credit

        Art. 395. In the circumstance of § 5 of art. 393 or upon finding an irregularity in the computation of the credit calculated by the beneficiary after the
  payment has been made by the Union and the full return, with the interest increase provided for in § 2 of art. 393, has not occurred, within the period of § 4 of art. 394, nor the authorization
  referred to in § 5 of art. 394, the RFB shall notify ex officio, in the manner to be established by it, the establishment of the Union's credit composed of:

            I - principal amount: equivalent to the amount unduly received that was not returned or offset;

        II - default interest: principal amount multiplied by the SELIC Rate for federal securities, accrued monthly, starting from the first day of the month following the
  date of the undue receipt until the month preceding the date of the notification;

            III - 20% fine: portion resulting from 0.2 (two tenths) multiplied by the sum of default interest and principal amount.

        § 1 The RFB's right to establish the credit arising from the circumstance provided for in the caput expires after 3 (three) years, counted from the first day of the fiscal year
  following the occurrence of the undue receipt, subject to the provisions of § 6 of art. 393.

         § 2 Default interest accrues on the established credit at the same rate provided for in item II of the caput, accrued monthly starting from the month in which it was
  established, and of 1% (one percent) in the month of its payment.

         § 3 The notification issued, followed by due notice to the debtor, containing all the elements required by law, shall be a suitable instrument for registration in the Union's active
  debt.

            § 4 The procedural rite provided for in Law No. 9,784, of January 29, 1999, applies to the provisions of the caput, subject to the specific rules established in this
  article.

            § 5 The interested party may file an appeal within 30 (thirty) days counted from notice of the notification that established the credit in the circumstance provided for in the
  caput.

         § 6 The appeal filed does not suspend the obligation to pay the established credit, except if the party has also filed the appeal referred to in §
  7 of art. 394 and it is pending judgment, in which case the connection between both appeals must be observed.

         § 7 If the interested party timely complies with the notification referred to in § 10 of art. 394, the Union's credit established pursuant to the caput of this
  article shall be canceled.


         § 8 After notice of the establishment of the Union's credit which is not subject to suspended enforceability, there shall be an ex officio offset of the
  interested party's credits not yet paid until the amount of the debt is reached.

        § 9 If the appeal referred to in § 5 of this article is decided, in a final and definitive manner, wholly or partly in favor of the interested party, the
  established amount must be reduced or canceled and the amounts possibly offset pursuant to § 7 of this article shall be paid, increased by interest calculated pursuant to § 2 of art. 393, in
  accordance with the decision rendered.

        § 10. The portion of the credit corresponding to the principal amount and the proportional default interest that is collected shall be allocated to the Fund referred to in art. 12
  of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 23, 2023, if the collection occurs by December 31, 2032, and to the Fund referred to in art.
  159-A of the Federal Constitution, if on a later date.

       § 11. The 20% (twenty percent) fine provided for in item III of the caput, increased by the proportional default interest, shall be allocated to the Special Fund for
  Development and Improvement of Tax Enforcement Activities - FUNDAF, established by art. 6 of Decree-Law No. 1,437, of December 17, 1975.

                                                                                     Section VIII

                                                                       Of the Report for Criminal Purposes

        Art. 396. Within 10 (ten) days of the issuance of the infraction notice provided for in art. 395 of this Complementary Law, the corresponding
  criminal report to the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office must be made, in accordance with regulations to be issued by the RFB.

                                                                                      Section IX

                                                   Of the Communication and Tax Reporting by the Federated Units

        Art. 397. If the federated unit finds noncompliance with the conditions required by the rule granting the onerous benefit, it must notify the RFB within
  10 (ten) days, so that the RFB may effect the suspension or cancellation of the qualification.

         Art. 398. In tax proceedings in which the state or Federal District tax administration finds an irregularity in the enjoyment of an onerous benefit granted
  by the corresponding federated unit, when the situation falls within the offsetting circumstance referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law, the
  competent authority must, within 10 (ten) days of the act of finding the irregularity, report the facts accompanied by the evidence to the head of its
  agency, so that the agency may forward the matter to the RFB.

         Sole paragraph. The RFB and the tax administration of a federated unit are permitted, by means of an agreement, to regulate the format of the report, its
  routing, and, if convenient, the frequency of forwarding.

                                                                                      Section X

                                                                                Final Provisions

         Art. 399. By means of a written requisitory act, for purposes of verifying the requirement set forth in item IV of art. 389 of this Complementary Law, the public bodies
  of the Union, States, Federal District and Municipalities and any other entities or persons are required to provide the RFB with all information they have
  relating to compliance with conditions established in the act granting the onerous benefit.

          Art. 400. The RFB shall publish, under active transparency, the monthly list of beneficiaries of the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law,
  identifying the beneficiary, the federative unit granting the onerous benefit, the granting act, the type of tax benefit, the amount paid as compensation and the
  amount of the credit, if any, withheld for verification or compensation.

        Art. 401. Amounts paid to the holder of the onerous benefit as a result of the compensation referred to in art. 384 of this Complementary Law shall receive the same
  tax treatment as the tax benefit granted by the State or the Federal District, for purposes of the incidence of IRPJ, CSLL, PIS and COFINS.

        Art. 402. The State Finance Departments (Secretarias de Fazenda) of the federative units and the RFB shall designate officials to form a working group for the purposes of:

        I - identifying the types of incentives and tax or financial-tax benefits granted for a fixed term and subject to conditions;

        II - identifying the respective methods for calculating the resulting economic repercussions;

        III - proposing adjustments to the ancillary obligations to be submitted by the holders of onerous benefits, so that they include a demonstration of the
  economic repercussion of each tax or financial-tax benefit granted to them.

       Art. 403. The RFB shall specify its own electronic system for the processing and handling of the information, acts and procedures described in this Complementary
  Law, and specific resources must be reserved in the Union budget as of the year 2025. Effects to take place [Produção de efeitos]

         Art. 404. The Union shall supplement the resources referred to in § 1 of art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, in the event of
  insufficient resources for the compensation referred to in § 2 of the same article, limited to the amounts provided for in the annual budget bill.

         Sole Paragraph. The resources referred to in this Chapter shall not be subject to withholding, unlinking or any other restriction on disbursement, nor shall they be
  subject to the spending limitation rules set forth in art. 9 and in item II of § 1 of art. 31 of Complementary Law No. 101, of May 4, 2000.

        Art. 405. The financial balance of the Fund referred to in art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, existing as of December 31,
  2032, shall be provisioned in the amount corresponding to the sum of:

         I - the estimate of the total value of credits in processing and of credits administratively approved and still subject to the legal deadlines for
  authorization and payment;

        II - the estimate of the amount corresponding to the total amount of credits withheld by the RFB under the terms of §§ 4 and 5 of art. 392 of this Complementary Law; and

        III - the amount proportional to the judicial risk relating to any lawsuits whose subject matter is the payment of compensations denied at the
  administrative level.

        § 1 The amount referred to in item III of the caput shall be reviewed annually by joint act of the Attorney General of the Union (Advogado-Geral da União) and the Minister of State for Finance.

       § 2 The balance of the Fund referred to in art. 12 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023, existing as of December 31, 2032 and that
  exceeds the provisioning referred to in the caput shall be transferred to the National Regional Development Fund (Fundo Nacional de Desenvolvimento Regional), established by art. 159-A of the Federal Constitution
  in 120 (one hundred and twenty) equal monthly installments, subject to the adjustment provided for in § 3 of this article, as of July 2033.

        § 3 The balance to be transferred to the National Regional Development Fund and the corresponding installments shall be adjusted as follows:

        I - the return on available funds and any refund of payments to the Tax Benefits Compensation Fund (Fundo de Compensação de Benefícios Fiscais) shall be added to the balance and the
  remaining installments shall be increased proportionally;

        II - any excess provisioning, determined after periodic reviews, shall be added to the balance and the remaining installments shall be increased
  proportionally;

        III - any insufficiency of provisioning shall be deducted from the balance and the remaining installments shall be reduced proportionally.
        § 4 In the absence of a financial balance on the date referred to in the caput, the Tax Benefits Compensation Fund shall be dissolved, whereby:

        I - any need for subsequent compensation shall be met by means of a specific budget allocation;

        II - resources that are subsequently returned to the Tax Benefits Compensation Fund shall be transferred directly to the National Regional
  Development Fund, net of the amounts contributed under item I of this paragraph.

                                                                                  CHAPTER VII

                                                              ON THE TRANSITION APPLICABLE TO CAPITAL GOODS

         Art. 406. The incidence of the IBS and the CBS shall be subject to the rates established in this article on the sale of used machinery, vehicles and equipment acquired
  by December 31, 2032:

        I - whose acquisition was covered by a valid tax document; and

        II - which have remained recorded in the seller's fixed assets for more than 12 (twelve) months.

        § 1 With respect to the CBS, the rates provided for in this article apply only to the sale of the goods referred to in the caput whose acquisition:

        I - occurred by December 31, 2026; and

        II - was subject to the incidence of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins at a positive nominal rate.

        § 2 As of January 1, 2027, the CBS rate applicable to the sale of the goods referred to in the caput and § 1:

        I - is reduced to zero for the portion of the CBS tax base that is equal to or less than the net acquisition value of the good; and

        II - shall be that provided for the transaction, with respect to the portion of the CBS tax base that exceeds the net acquisition value of the good.

        § 3 With respect to the IBS, the rates provided for in this article apply only to the sale of the goods referred to in the caput whose acquisition:

        I - occurred by December 31, 2032; and

        II - was subject to the incidence of the ICMS at a positive nominal rate.

        § 4 As of January 1, 2029, the IBS rate applicable to the sale of the goods referred to in the caput and § 3:

        I - is reduced to zero for the portion of the value of the IBS tax base that is equal to or less than the net acquisition value of the good multiplied by:

        a) 1 (one whole), in the case of goods acquired by December 31, 2028;

        b) 0.9 (nine tenths), in the case of goods acquired in calendar year 2029;

        c) 0.8 (eight tenths), in the case of goods acquired in calendar year 2030;

        d) 0.7 (seven tenths), in the case of goods acquired in calendar year 2031; and

        e) 0.6 (six tenths), in the case of goods acquired in calendar year 2032; and

         II - shall be that provided for the transaction, with respect to the portion of the value of the IBS tax base that exceeds the net acquisition value determined after the
  adjustments provided for in item I of this paragraph.

         § 5 In the sale of the goods referred to in the caput, the provisions of § 3 of art. 380 of this Complementary Law shall be observed with respect to the CBS, and of item V of § 5 of
  art. 20 of Complementary Law No. 87, of September 13, 1996, with respect to the ICMS.

        § 6 For purposes of this article, net acquisition value shall be understood as:

        I - for goods acquired by December 31, 2026, the amount corresponding to the difference between:

        a) the total acquisition value of the good recorded on the tax invoice; and

        b) the value of the ICMS, of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and of the Cofins levied on the acquisition of the good, as recorded on the tax invoice, that have allowed the
  appropriation of credits for the respective taxes; and

        II - for goods acquired from January 1, 2027 to December 31, 2032, the tax base of the IBS and the CBS, as recorded on the tax invoice, plus
  the amount of ICMS levied on the acquisition that did not allow the appropriation of credits.

          § 7 For purposes of item I of § 6, if there is no information on the amount of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins levied on the transaction
  in which the good was acquired, the calculation of the difference shall use the amount corresponding to the application of the rates of 1.65% (one point sixty-five percent
  ) for the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and of 7.6% (seven point six percent) for the Cofins on the acquisition value of the good stated on the tax
  invoice.

       § 8 For the purposes of this article, goods of the same nature that, as a result of the applicable accounting standards, are
  recorded by public service concessionaires as contract, intangible or financial assets shall also be considered assets recorded in fixed assets.

       Art. 407. The incidence of the IBS and the CBS shall be subject to the rates established in this article on the resale of used machinery, vehicles and equipment
  acquired used.

        § 1 The provisions of this article apply only to:

        I - resale carried out by a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime; and

        II - machinery, vehicles or equipment whose acquisition and resale are covered by a valid tax document.

        § 2 In the resale of goods referred to in the caput acquired by December 31, 2026 and that did not allow the appropriation of credits of the Contribuição
  para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins, the CBS rate:

        I - is reduced to zero for the portion of the value of the CBS tax base that is equal to or less than the net acquisition value of the good; and

        II - shall be that provided for the transaction, with respect to the portion of the CBS tax base that exceeds the net acquisition value of the good.

        § 3 The provisions of § 2 do not apply to the resale of goods referred to in the caput acquired from an individual.



         § 4 In the resale of goods acquired by the reseller as of January 1, 2027 and whose acquisition was benefited by the reduction to zero of rates
  established provided for by art. 406 of this Complementary Law:

        I - the CBS rate applicable to the resale of the good:

         a) is reduced to zero for the portion of the value of the CBS tax base that was benefited by the reduction to zero of the CBS rate under the terms of
  item I of § 2 of art. 406 of this Complementary Law when the good was acquired; and

        b) shall be that provided for the transaction, with respect to the portion of the CBS tax base that exceeds the amount referred to in item "a" of this item; and

        II - the IBS rate applicable to the resale of the good:

         a) is reduced to zero for the portion of the value of the IBS tax base that was benefited by the reduction to zero of the IBS rate under the terms of
  item I of § 4 of art. 406 of this Complementary Law when the good was acquired; and

        b) shall be that provided for the transaction, with respect to the portion of the IBS tax base that exceeds the amount referred to in item "a" of this item.

                                                                                  CHAPTER VIII

                                                                             FINAL PROVISIONS

        Art. 408. Without prejudice to the other rules established in this Complementary Law, during the transition period to the IBS and the CBS, the provisions
  of this article shall apply.

        § 1 Should the same situation provided for by law constitute, until December 31, 2025, a taxable event of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and of the Cofins or of the
  Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep - Importação and of the Cofins-Importação, and, as of January 1, 2026, a taxable event of the CBS, the following shall be observed:

        § 1 Should the same situation provided for by law constitute, until December 31, 2026, a taxable event of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and of the Cofins or of the
  Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep-Importação and of the Cofins-Importação, and, as of January 1, 2027, a taxable event of the CBS, the following shall be observed:
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - the CBS shall not be required;

        II - the following shall be required, as applicable:

        a) Cofins;

        b) Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep;

        c) Cofins - Importação;

        d) Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep - Importação.

          § 2 The provisions of § 1 of this article shall not apply in cases where the assessment and collection of the CBS are carried out under the terms of optional
  regimes provided for in this Complementary Law, in which case the CBS shall be required and the social contributions referred to in item II of § 1 of this
  article shall not be required.
         § 2 The provision of § 1 of this article shall not apply in cases in which the assessment and collection of the CBS are carried out under the terms of
  optional regimes provided for in arts. 485 to 487 of this Complementary Law, in which case the CBS shall be charged and the social contributions referred to in
  item II of § 1 of this article shall not be charged. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 3 For operations occurring until December 31, 2026, including those constituting a pending taxable event on the date of publication of this Complementary
  Law, in cases in which the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins are charged as revenue is actually received under the cash basis regime:

        I - the taxable event of the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins shall be deemed to have occurred on the date the revenue was earned under the accrual basis regime;

         II - the Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins shall be charged at the time the revenue is received, even if this occurs after the said
  contributions have been extinguished; and

        III - the CBS shall not be charged on the receipt of revenue arising from the operation, except in the case of § 2 of this article, in which case the
  Contribuição para o PIS/Pasep and the Cofins shall not be charged.

        § 4 During the period from 2029 to 2032:

         I - if the same operation constitutes, in different calendar years, taxable events of the Tax on Transactions Relating to the Circulation of Goods and
  on Interstate and Intermunicipal Transportation and Communication Services (ICMS) or of the Tax on Services of Any Nature (ISS) and of the
  IBS, the legislation in force in the calendar year of the first occurrence shall prevail with respect to the said taxes; and

        II - if the temporal element of the taxable-event hypothesis of the ICMS or the ISS has not been completed by December 31, 2032:

        a) the said taxes shall not be levied on the operation; and

        b) only the IBS shall be due on the operation.

        § 5 In the case of item II of § 4, the remaining amount of IBS due shall be assessed based on the legislation in force as of January 1, 2033.

                                                                                     BOOK II

                                                                            OF THE SELECTIVE TAX

                                                                                     TITLE I

                                                                         PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

        Art. 409. The Selective Tax, referred to in item VIII of art. 153 of the Federal Constitution, is hereby instituted, levied on the production, extraction, marketing
  or importation of goods and services harmful to health or the environment.

        § 1 For purposes of the levy of the Selective Tax, the goods classified under the NCM/SH codes and
  mineral coal, and the services listed in Annex XVII, relating to the following, are considered harmful to health or the environment:

        I - vehicles;

        II - vessels and aircraft;

        III - tobacco products;
        IV - alcoholic beverages;

        V - sugary beverages;

        VI - mineral goods;

        VII - prognostic contests and fantasy sport.

        § 2 The goods referred to in items III and IV of § 1 are subject to the Selective Tax when packaged in primary packaging, understood as
  that which is in direct contact with the product and intended for the final consumer.

        Art. 410. The Selective Tax shall be levied only once on the good or service, and any use of credit of the tax with
  prior operations or generation of credits for subsequent operations is prohibited.

        Art. 411. The RFB is responsible for the administration and inspection of the Selective Tax.

        Sole paragraph. Administrative litigation within the scope of the Selective Tax shall comply with the provisions of Decree No. 70.235, of March 6, 1972.

                                                                                   TITLE II

                                                               OF THE GENERAL RULES OF THE SELECTIVE TAX

                                                                                  CHAPTER I

                                                             OF THE MOMENT OF OCCURRENCE OF THE TAXABLE EVENT

        Art. 412. The taxable event of the Selective Tax shall be deemed to have occurred at the moment of:

       I - the first supply, under any title, of the good, including that arising from the legal transactions mentioned in items I to VIII of § 2 of art. 4 of this Complementary
  Law;

        II - the auction at public sale;

        III - the non-onerous transfer of a produced good;

        IV - the incorporation of the good into fixed assets by the manufacturer;

        V - the extraction of a mineral good;

        VI - the consumption of the good by the manufacturer;

        VII - the supply or payment of the service, whichever occurs first; or

        VIII - the importation of goods and services.

                                                                                 CHAPTER II

                                                                             OF NON-INCIDENCE

        Art. 413. The Selective Tax does not apply to:

        I - (VETOED);

        II - operations with electric energy and telecommunications; and

        III - goods and services whose rates are reduced under the terms of § 1 of art. 9 of Constitutional Amendment No. 132, of December 20, 2023.

                                                                                 CHAPTER III

                                                                            OF THE TAX BASE

        Art. 414. The tax base of the Selective Tax is:

        I - the sale value in marketing;

        II - the auction value in the auction;

        III - the reference value in:

        a) a non-onerous transaction or in the consumption of the good;

        b) extraction of a mineral good; or

        c) marketing of tobacco products;

        c) marketing and importation of tobacco products;      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        IV - the accounting value of incorporation of the produced good into fixed assets;

        V - the entity's own revenue promoting the activity, in the case referred to in item VII of § 1 of art. 409 of this Complementary Law, calculated under the
  terms of art. 245.

        VI - the market value of the good, in the remaining cases.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1 In cases in which the application of specific rates is provided for, under the terms of this Complementary Law, the tax base is that expressed in a
  unit of measure.

        § 2 An act of the head of the Federal Executive Branch shall define the methodology for calculating the reference value mentioned in item III of the caput of this article, based,
  among other things, on quotations, indices or prices in force on the date of the taxable event, on commodities and futures exchanges, on research agencies or on
  government agencies.

        § 3 In the marketing of tobacco products, the reference value shall take into account the retail sale price.

        Art. 415. In the marketing of a good subject to the ad valorem rate, the tax base is the full amount charged in the operation under any title, including the amount
  corresponding to:
        I - additions arising from adjustment of the value of the operation;

        II - interest, fines, additions and charges;

        III - discounts granted under condition;

        IV - the value of transport charged as part of the value of the operation, whether the transport is carried out by the supplier itself or on its behalf and order;

       V - taxes and public prices, including tariffs, levied on the operation or borne by the supplier, except those provided for in § 2 of art. 12 of this Complementary
  Law; and

        VI - other amounts charged or received as part of the value of the operation, including insurance and fees.

        Sole paragraph. If the value of the operation is expressed in foreign currency, it shall be converted into national currency at the exchange rate assessed
  by the Central Bank of Brazil, under the terms of the regulation.

         Art. 416. In marketing between related parties, in the case of a levy subject to the ad valorem rate and in the absence of the reference value referred to
  in § 2 of art. 414, the tax base shall not be lower than the market value of the goods, understood as the value practiced in comparable operations between
  unrelated parties.

        Sole paragraph. For purposes of the provision in the caput, related parties are considered to be those defined in §§ 2 to 5 of art. 5 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 417. The following do not form part of the tax base of the Selective Tax:

        I - the amount of the CBS, the IBS and the Selective Tax itself levied on the operation; and

        II - unconditional discounts.

       § 1 For purposes of the provision in item II of the caput, an unconditional discount is considered to be the portion reducing the price of the operation that appears in the respective
  tax document and does not depend on a subsequent event.

       § 2 A bonus that meets the same conditions specified in § 1 for the characterization of
  unconditional discounts does not form part of the tax base of the Selective Tax.

        § 3 The provision of § 2 does not apply to taxation by means of a specific rate, in which the tax base, expressed in a unit of measure, must consider
  the goods supplied as a bonus.

        § 4 Until December 31, 2032, the amount of the following does not form part of the tax base of the Selective Tax:

      I - the Tax on Transactions Relating to the Circulation of Goods and on Interstate and Intermunicipal Transportation and
  Communication Services (ICMS), provided for in item II of art. 155 of the Federal Constitution;

        II - the Tax on Services of Any Nature (ISS), provided for in item III of art. 156 of the Federal Constitution.

       Art. 418. The return of goods sold gives rise to the right to deduct the amount of the Selective Tax charged in the respective operation in the assessment period
  in which the return occurred or in subsequent periods.

                                                                                  CHAPTER IV

                                                                                OF THE RATES

                                                                                     Section I

                                                                                  Of Vehicles

        Art. 419. The rates of the Selective Tax applicable to vehicles classified under the NCM/SH codes listed in Annex XVII shall be established by
  ordinary law.

        Sole paragraph. The rates referred to in the caput of this article shall be graduated in relation to each vehicle according to classification under the following criteria, under the
  terms of ordinary law:

        I - vehicle power;

        II - energy efficiency;

        III - structural performance and driving assistance technologies;

        IV - recyclability of materials;

        V - carbon footprint;

        VI - technological density;

        VII - carbon dioxide emissions (energy-environmental efficiency), considering the well-to-wheel cycle;

        VIII - vehicle recyclability;

        IX - performance of manufacturing stages in the Country; and

        X - vehicle category.

        Art. 420. The rate of the Selective Tax is reduced to zero for vehicles intended for acquirers whose right to the benefit of the differentiated regime
  provided for in art. 149 of this Complementary Law has been recognized by the RFB, under the terms of art. 153.

         § 1º In the case of the acquirer being a person referred to in item II of the caput of art. 149 of this Complementary Law, the rate reduction referred to
  in the caput applies to a vehicle whose sale price to the consumer, including taxes levied had there been no reductions, is not higher than R$ 200,000.00 (two hundred thousand reais).

       § 2º Subject to the provisions of § 1º, the provisions applicable to the differentiated regime provided for in Section VII
  of Chapter IV of Title IV of Book I apply to the Selective Tax, as applicable, including with regard to the disposal of the vehicle and the interval for enjoyment of the benefit.

                                                                                     Section II

                                                                          Of Aircraft and Vessels



        Art. 421. The rates of the Selective Tax applicable to aircraft and vessels classified under the NCM/SH codes listed in Annex XVII shall
  be established in ordinary law and may be graduated according to environmental sustainability criteria under the terms of the ordinary law.

        Sole paragraph. The ordinary law may provide for a zero rate for vessels and aircraft with zero carbon dioxide emissions or with high
  energy-environmental efficiency.

                                                                                      Section III

                                                                   Of Other Goods Subject to the Selective Tax

        Art. 422. Subject to the provisions of arts. 419 and 420, the rates of the Selective Tax applicable to transactions with the goods and services referred to in Annex
  XVII are those provided for in ordinary law.

         § 1º Ad valorem rates combined with specific rates shall be applied to:

         I - tobacco products classified under heading 24.02 of the NCM/SH; and

         II - alcoholic beverages, for which the specific rates must consider the product of the alcohol content by the volume of the products.

        § 2º The rates of the Selective Tax established for transactions with extracted mineral goods shall respect the maximum percentage of 0.25% (twenty-five
  hundredths percent).

         § 2º The rates of the Selective Tax shall respect the maximum percentage of 0.25% (twenty-five hundredths percent), for transactions with extracted mineral
  goods. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 3º Ordinary law may establish specific rates for other tobacco products not referred to in item I of § 1º, which shall be applied
  cumulatively with the ad valorem rates.

         § 4º The ad valorem rates established for transactions with alcoholic beverages may be differentiated by product category and progressive based on
  alcohol content.

          § 5º The rates of the Selective Tax levied on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products shall be set in a staggered manner, so as to incorporate, from
  2029 to 2033, progressively, the differential between the ICMS rates levied on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products and the
  standard rates of that tax.

        § 5º The rates of the Selective Tax levied on the products provided for in items III to V of § 1º of art. 409 of this Complementary Law shall be set in
  a staggered manner, so as to incorporate, from 2029 to 2033, progressively, the differential between the ICMS rates levied on
  tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, and sugary beverages and the standard rates of that tax. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 6º The adjustment referred to in § 5º:

         I - in the case of alcoholic beverages may be carried out by estimate for the group of beverages as a whole or be differentiated by beverage category; and

         II - shall not condition the setting of the Selective Tax rates on the maintenance of the tax burden of the sectors or of specific categories.

         § 7º The rates applicable to alcoholic beverages may be established so as to differentiate transactions carried out by small producers,
  as defined in ordinary law.

         § 8º To ensure the provisions of § 7º, the rates may be:

         I - progressive based on production volume; and

         II - differentiated by product category.

        Art. 423. If natural gas is intended for use as input in an industrial process and as fuel for transport purposes, the rate
  established under § 2º of art. 422 of this Complementary Law must be set at zero.

          § 1º For purposes of applying the provisions of the caput, the acquirer or the importer must, in the manner set out in the regulation, declare that the natural gas will be intended for
  use as input in an industrial process.

        § 2º In the event that natural gas acquired or imported with a rate reduction is given a destination other than that provided for in the caput, the acquirer or
  the importer must pay the Selective Tax calculated by applying the rate established under § 2º of art. 422 of this Complementary Law, plus
  penalty and default interest under the terms of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, in the capacity of:

         I - responsible party, for the acquirer; or

         II - taxpayer, for the importer.

                                                                                     CHAPTER V

                                                                                OF TAX LIABILITY

         Art. 424. The taxpayer of the Selective Tax is:

         I - the manufacturer, upon the first sale, upon incorporation of the good into fixed assets, upon transfer of the good in a non-onerous transaction, or upon consumption of the
  good;

         I - the manufacturer, upon the first supply, upon incorporation of the good into fixed assets, upon transfer of the good in a non-onerous transaction, or upon consumption of the
  good;     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         II - the importer upon entry of the good of foreign origin into national territory;

         III - the successful bidder upon the auction;

         IV - the extractive producer that carries out the extraction; or

         V - the service supplier, even if resident or domiciled abroad, in the case referred to in item VII of § 1º of art. 409 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 425. The following are obligated to pay the Selective Tax as responsible parties, without prejudice to the other cases provided for in law and to the application of the penalty of
  forfeiture:

         I - the carrier, in relation to taxed products that it transports unaccompanied by tax documentation proving their origin;

       II - the possessor or holder, in relation to taxed products that it possesses or keeps for sale or industrialization purposes, unaccompanied by the
  tax documentation proving their origin;
        III - the owner, the possessor, the carrier, or any other holder of domestic products that left the manufacturer with immunity for export,
  found in the Country in a different situation, except when the products are in transit:

        a) intended for use or consumption on board, in vessels or aircraft on international routes, with payment in convertible currency;

        b) intended for duty-free shops, in a direct sale transaction, under the terms and conditions established by art. 15 of Decree-Law No. 1,455, of April 7, 1976;

        c) acquired by the export trading company referred to in art. 82 of this Complementary Law, for the specific purpose of export, and sent directly
  from the industrial establishment for export shipment or to bonded facilities, on behalf and by order of the acquirer; or

        d) sent to bonded facilities or to other locations where export customs clearance is processed.

       Sole paragraph. If the manufacturer has in any way contributed to the case provided for in item III of the caput, it shall be jointly and severally liable for
  payment of the tax.

                                                                                     CHAPTER VI

                                                                    OF THE EXPORT TRADING COMPANY

        Art. 426. The Selective Tax does not apply to the supply of goods for the specific purpose of export to an export trading company that meets the requirements
  in the caput and in §§ 1º and 2º of art. 82 of this Complementary Law.

       Art. 427. The export trading company is responsible for the payment of the Selective Tax that was not paid on the supply of goods to the
  export trading company, in the cases referred to in § 5º of art. 82 of this Complementary Law.

       § 1º For the purposes of the provisions of the caput, the Selective Tax is deemed due on the date of occurrence of the taxable event, as defined in art. 412 of this
  Complementary Law.

        § 2º Amounts that are not paid shall be subject to penalty and default interest under the terms of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3º The provisions of § 10 of art. 82 of this Complementary Law apply to the Selective Tax.

                                                                                    CHAPTER VII

                                                                             OF THE PENALTY OF FORFEITURE

        Art. 428. Without prejudice to the other legal cases, the penalty of forfeiture applies in cases of transport, storage, or display for sale of the
  tobacco products listed in Annex XVII unaccompanied by tax documentation proving their origin.

        § 1º The application of the penalty of forfeiture referred to in the caput of this article does not prejudice the collection of the Selective Tax due.

        § 2º In the case of the caput of this article, if the goods are being transported, the penalty of forfeiture also applies to the vehicle used, if the circumstances
  show that the owner of the vehicle, its possessor, or its agents, through action or omission, contributed to the commission of the unlawful act, facilitated its occurrence,
  or benefited from it.

        § 3º For purposes of the provisions of § 2º:

        I - omission by the owner of the vehicle, its possessor, or its agents is deemed to occur when there is failure to require appropriate documentation in situations where the
  characteristics, volume, or quantity of goods transported on behalf and by order of the contracting party or passenger allow inference of the unlawful practice;

         II - contribution by the owner of the vehicle, its possessor, or its agents to the unlawful practice is presumed in situations where adaptation of the
  vehicle structure aimed at concealing the transported goods is found;

        III - ownership of the vehicle and the value of the transported goods are irrelevant; and

        IV - it is incumbent upon vehicle rental companies to take precautions regarding the background of lessees or authorized drivers, under penalty of presumption of their collaboration
  in the unlawful practice.

        Art. 429. Except in the case of export, treated tobacco leaves, wholly or partially de-stemmed, trimmed or not, even if cut into regular shapes
  or shredded, shall only be sold or sent to a company that processes cigars, cigarettes, cigarillos, or shredded, cut, crumbled, or powdered tobacco, in rolls
  or in rope form.

        § 1º The commercialization of the products referred to in the caput of this article between establishments engaged in the activity of processing and
  packaging by baling is permitted.

        § 2º The Federal Executive Branch shall require, for the transactions referred to in this article, the necessary means of control.

        § 3º Goods found in transport, storage, or display for sale in disagreement with the determination of the caput are subject to the penalty provided in art. 428
  of this Complementary Law.

        § 4º (VETOED).

                                                                                    CHAPTER VIII

                                                                                    OF ASSESSMENT

        Art. 430. The assessment period for the Selective Tax shall be monthly and the regulation shall establish:

        I - the deadline for completion of the assessment; and

        II - the due date.

        Art. 431. The assessment relating to the Selective Tax shall consolidate the operations carried out by all establishments of the taxpayer.

                                                                                     CHAPTER IX

                                                                                   OF PAYMENT

        Art. 432. The Selective Tax shall be paid by collection of the amount due by the taxable person.

        Art. 433. Payment of the Selective Tax shall be centralized at a single establishment and, in the manner provided in its regulation, may occur upon the financial
  settlement of the operation (split payment), observing the provisions of arts. 31 to 35 of this Complementary Law.

                                                                                       TITLE III


                                                               OF THE SELECTIVE TAX ON IMPORTS

        Art. 434. The following applies to the Selective Tax, on the import of material goods:

        I - art. 65 of this Complementary Law, in relation to the taxable event;

        II - art. 66 and item III of art. 413 of this Complementary Law, in relation to non-incidence;

        III - art. 67 of this Complementary Law, in relation to the moment of occurrence of the taxable event; and

        IV - arts. 72, 73 and 74 of this Complementary Law, in relation to tax liability.

        § 1º The rates of the Selective Tax levied on imports shall be set by ordinary law.

        § 2º If the rate of the Selective Tax is ad valorem, its tax base, on import, shall be the customs value plus the amount of the Import
  Tax.

         § 2º-A. In the case of import of tobacco products subject to the ad valorem rate of the Selective Tax, the tax base shall be the greater between that provided
  in item "c" of item III of art. 414 and that provided in § 2º of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3º The Selective Tax, on import, must be paid upon registration of the import declaration.

          § 4º Payment of the Selective Tax levied on the import of material goods is suspended when admitted under the regimes referred to in Chapters I
  and II of Title II of Book I, observing the discipline established in customs legislation.

        § 5º In the case of duty-free shops, the suspension referred to in § 4º of this article covers goods imported and goods acquired in the domestic market.

        § 6º In the case of goods temporarily admitted into the Country for economic use, the suspension of payment of the Selective Tax shall be partial, and shall be
  paid proportionally to the length of stay of the goods in the Country, under the terms of art. 89 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 435. Exempt from payment of the Selective Tax on the import of material goods are:

        I - baggage of travelers and crew members, accompanied or unaccompanied, when subject to the special taxation regime; and

        II - international shipments, when subject to the simplified taxation regime.

                                                                                     TITLE IV

                                                                              FINAL PROVISIONS

        Art. 436. The specific rates referred to in this Book shall be updated by the IPCA once a year, under the terms of ordinary law.

        Art. 437. The RFB may establish an electronic communication system to be assigned as DTE, which shall be used for purposes of notification, summons, or
  notices provided for in the legislation of the Selective Tax.

        Art. 438. The regulation of the Selective Tax dealt with in this Book shall be issued by the head of the Federal Executive Branch.

                                                                                     BOOK III

                                                                           OF THE OTHER PROVISIONS

                                                                                     TITLE I

                 OF THE MANAUS FREE TRADE ZONE, THE FREE TRADE AREAS AND THE REFUND OF THE IBS AND THE CBS TO FOREIGN TOURISTS

                                                                                    CHAPTER I

                                                                         OF THE MANAUS FREE TRADE ZONE

        Art. 439. The benefits relating to the Manaus Free Trade Zone established in this Chapter apply until the date established by art. 92-A of the ADCT.

        Art. 440. For purposes of this Chapter, the following are considered:

        I - Manaus Free Trade Zone the area defined and demarcated by specific legislation;

          II - incentivized industry a legal entity that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS and authorized in the manner of art. 442 of this Complementary Law to enjoy
  tax benefits in the industrialization of goods in the Manaus Free Trade Zone, except those referred to in art. 441 of this Complementary Law;

        II - incentivized industry a legal entity that is a taxpayer of the IBS and the CBS and authorized in the manner of item II of art. 442 of this Complementary Law
  to enjoy tax benefits in the industrialization of goods in the Manaus Free Trade Zone, except those referred to in art. 441 of this Complementary Law; (Wording given
  by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - intermediate good:

        a) the industrialized product intended for incorporation or consumption in the industrialization process of other goods, provided the immediate recipient is an
  industrial establishment;

        b) the product intended for packaging by industrial establishments;

        IV - final good, that on which no further value is added in the production process and that is intended for consumption.

       Sole paragraph. For purposes of this Chapter, in all operations between related parties the provisions of § 4º of art. 12 of this Complementary
  Law shall be observed.

        Art. 441. Not covered by the favored regime of the Manaus Free Trade Zone are:

        a) weapons and ammunition;

        b) tobacco and its derivatives;

        c) alcoholic beverages;

        d) passenger automobiles;



         e) petroleum, lubricants and liquid and gaseous fuels derived from petroleum, except for the petroleum refining industry located in the Manaus Free Trade
  Zone, exclusively in relation to internal shipments to that incentivized area, provided the basic production process is complied with, the prohibition remaining
  in place for all other stages; and

        f) perfumery or toiletry products, cosmetic preparations and preparations, except with respect to these (headings 3303 to 3307 of the Mercosul Common
  Nomenclature), if intended exclusively for internal consumption in the Manaus Free Trade Zone or if produced using raw materials of regional fauna and flora,
  in accordance with the basic production process.

        Art. 442. Under terms defined in regulation, it is a condition for qualification for the tax incentives of the Manaus Free Trade Zone:

         I - the specific registration in the registry of the Superintendência da Zona Franca de Manaus - Suframa, for the legal entity that carries out commercial activity
  or the supply of services; and

        I - the specific registration in the registry of the Superintendência da Zona Franca de Manaus (Suframa), for the legal entity that carries out commercial
  activity or the supply of services or industrial activity not covered by the provision of item II of this article; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        II - the specific registration and approval of a technical-economic project by the Administrative Council of Suframa, based on the respective basic
  production processes, for a legal entity that carries out industrial activity.

        II - the specific registration and approval of a technical-economic project by the Administrative Council of Suframa, based on the respective basic
  production processes, for a legal entity that carries out incentivized industrial activity. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Sole paragraph. In the process of approving the projects and the basic production processes referred to in this article, the State of
  Amazonas and the Municipality of Manaus shall be heard.

       Art. 443. The levy of the IBS and the CBS on the importation of material goods carried out by incentivized industry for use in the Manaus Free Trade
  Zone is suspended.

        § 1º The suspension referred to in the caput does not apply to imports of:

        I - goods not covered by the favored regime of the Manaus Free Trade Zone provided for in art. 441 of this Complementary Law; and

         II - goods for personal use and consumption referred to in art. 57 of this Complementary Law, unless it is demonstrated that they are necessary for the
  development of the taxpayer's activity linked to the approved technical-economic project.

        § 2º The suspension referred to in the caput converts into exemption:

        I - when the imported goods are consumed or incorporated into the importer's production process in the Manaus Free Trade Zone;

         II - after the full depreciation of the good or its remaining in the fixed assets of the acquiring establishment for 48 (forty-eight) months, whichever
  occurs first.

        § 3º Should goods imported with the suspension referred to in the caput be sent outside the Manaus Free Trade Zone before the conversion into exemption
  referred to in § 2º of this article, the importer must collect the suspended taxes with the applicable legal additions, in the manner set forth in § 2º of art. 29 of this
  Complementary Law, with the appropriation and use of credits permitted in the manner of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law in relation to amounts actually paid,
  except in relation to the legal additions.

        Art. 444. A presumed credit of IBS relating to the importation of material goods for in-person resale in the Manaus Free Trade Zone is granted to the taxpayer qualified in the manner of art. 442 and subject to the regular regime or to the Simples Nacional. Effective as of a future date

         § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying a percentage corresponding to 50% (fifty percent) of the IBS
  rate applicable on the import.

        § 2º The presumed credit referred to in this article must be deducted from the amount of IBS due on the import.

         § 3º To the importer of the goods referred to in the caput subject to the regular IBS regime, the appropriation and use of the full IBS credits is guaranteed for the
  amount of the tax levied on the import, observing the rules set forth in arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        § 4º The importer must collect IBS corresponding to the amount of the presumed credit deducted from the amount due on the import, with the applicable legal additions,
  in the manner of § 2º of art. 29, from the date of import, if:

        I - the resale does not comply with the requirement set forth in the caput;

        II - the entry of the good into the establishment of destination in the Manaus Free Trade Zone is not proven within the time limits established in regulation; and

        II - the good is resold outside the Manaus Free Trade Zone or transferred outside the Manaus Free Trade Zone.

        § 5º (VETOED).

         Art. 445. The IBS and CBS rates levied on transactions originating outside the Manaus Free Trade Zone that direct industrialized material goods
  of national origin to a taxpayer established in the Manaus Free Trade Zone are reduced to zero, where such taxpayer is:

        I - qualified under the terms of art. 442 of this Complementary Law; and

       II - subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS or an opting member of the Simples Nacional regime referred to in art. 12 of Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14,
  2006.

        § 1º The provision of the caput does not apply to transactions with goods referred to in § 1º of art. 443.

        § 2º The taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS that carries out the transactions referred to in the caput may appropriate and use the credits relating to
  preceding transactions, observing the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3º Specific controls must be instituted for verification of the entry into the Manaus Free Trade Zone of the material goods referred to in the caput, under the terms
  of the regulation.

         § 4º Should there be no proof that the goods destined for the Manaus Free Trade Zone entered their destination, within the time limits established in regulation, the
  taxpayer must collect the amount of IBS and CBS that would be due had there been no reduction of rates to zero, with the applicable legal additions, in the manner
  of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

        § 5º The provision of the caput also applies to transactions with intermediate material goods submitted to industrialization by order.

        Art. 446. The IBS will be levied on the entry, into the state of Amazonas, of material goods that had been covered by the reduction of rates to zero under the
  terms of art. 445 of this Complementary Law, except where destined for incentivized industry for use in the Manaus Free Trade Zone. Effective as of a future date


        § 1º In the case referred to in the caput:

        I - the IBS taxpayer will be the recipient of the transaction referred to in the caput of art. 445 of this Complementary Law;

        II - the tax base will be the value of the transaction referred to in the caput of art. 445 of this Complementary Law;

       III - the IBS will be charged by applying a rate corresponding to 70% (seventy percent) of the rate that would be levied on the respective transaction had there
  been no reduction to zero established by art. 445 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The amount of IBS paid in the manner of item III of § 1º will allow the taxpayer to appropriate and use the tax credit, in the manner of arts. 47 to 56
  of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 447. A presumed credit of IBS relating to the acquisition of industrialized material goods of national origin covered by the reduction to zero of the IBS
  rate under the terms of art. 445 of this Complementary Law is granted to the taxpayer subject to the regular IBS regime and qualified under the terms of art. 442 of this Complementary Law. Effective as of a future date

        § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the following percentages on the value of the transaction covered by the
  reduction to zero of the IBS rate under the terms of art. 445 of this Complementary Law:

        I - 7.5% (seven whole and five tenths percent), in the case of goods originating from the South and Southeast regions, except from the State of Espírito Santo; and

        II - 13.5% (thirteen whole and five tenths percent), in the case of goods originating from the North, Northeast and Center-West regions and from the State of Espírito Santo.

        § 2º The presumed credit must be reversed if:

        I - the entry of the good into the establishment of destination in the Manaus Free Trade Zone is not proven within the time limits established in regulation, requiring
  the applicable legal additions under the terms of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law;

        II - the good is resold outside the ZFM or transferred outside the ZFM, with legal additions not required if the reversal is carried out in a timely manner.

       § 3º When goods submitted to industrialization by order return to the party that ordered them, the presumed credit referred to in the caput applies only
  to the value added in this industrialization process.

        Art. 448. The IBS and CBS rates levied on transactions carried out by incentivized industry that direct intermediate material goods to another incentivized
  industry in the Manaus Free Trade Zone are reduced to zero, provided that the delivery or making available of the goods occurs within said area.

        § 1º The provision of the caput does not apply to transactions with goods referred to in § 1º of art. 443 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The appropriation and use of the credits relating to preceding transactions is assured to the taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS that carries out
  the transactions referred to in the caput, under the terms of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         § 3º The provision of the caput also applies to transactions with intermediate material goods submitted to industrialization by order, in relation to the value
  added in the industrialization.

         Art. 449. A presumed credit of IBS relating to the acquisition of intermediate goods produced in said area is granted to incentivized industry in the Manaus Free Trade
  Zone, subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, provided that the good is covered by the reduction to zero of the rate established by art. 448 of this Complementary
  Law and is used for incorporation or consumption in the production of final goods. Effective as of a future date

        § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the percentage of 7.5% (seven whole and five tenths percent) on the value
  of the transaction covered by the reduction to zero of the IBS rate established by art. 448 of this Complementary Law.

       § 2º At the moment goods submitted to industrialization by order return to the party that ordered them, the presumed credit referred to in the caput applies only
  to the value added in this industrialization process.

          Art. 450. Presumed credits of IBS and CBS relating to transactions that direct to the national territory, including to the Manaus Free Trade Zone itself,
  material goods produced by the incentivized industry itself in said area under the terms of the approved economic project, except in relation to the transactions provided for
  in art. 447 of this Complementary Law, are granted to incentivized industry in the Manaus Free Trade Zone.        Effective as of a future date

          Art. 450. Presumed credits of IBS and CBS relating to transactions that direct to the national territory, including to the Manaus Free Trade Zone itself,
  material goods produced by the incentivized industry itself in said area under the terms of the approved economic project, except in relation to the transactions provided for
  in art. 448 of this Complementary Law, are granted to incentivized industry in the Manaus Free Trade Zone.       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        § 1º The presumed credit of IBS referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the following percentages on the debit balance of IBS in the assessment
  period:    Effective as of a future date

        I - 55% (fifty-five percent) for final consumption goods;

        II - 75% (seventy-five percent) for capital goods;

        III - 90.25% (ninety whole and twenty-five hundredths percent) for intermediate goods; and

         IV - 100% (one hundred percent) for information technology goods and for products for which the legislation of the State of Amazonas, until December
  31, 2023, established an ICMS incentive credit at this percentage.

       § 2º The presumed credit of CBS referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the following percentages on the value of the transaction recorded on
  a valid tax document:  Effective as of a future date

        I - 6% (six percent) on the sale of products, under the terms of art. 454 of this Complementary Law; or

        II - 2% (two percent) in other cases.

        § 3º The provision of the caput does not apply to transactions:      Effective as of a future date

        I - not subject to levy or covered by cases of exemption, zero rate, suspension or deferral of the IBS and the CBS; and

        II - with goods not covered by the favored regime of the Manaus Free Trade Zone, provided for in art. 441 of this Complementary Law.

         § 4º To acquirers of the goods referred to in the caput subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, the full appropriation and use of the credits
  relating to the IBS and the CBS is guaranteed for the value of said taxes levied on the transaction and recorded on a valid tax document, observing the rules provided for in the
  arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law. Effective as of a future date

        § 5º In the case of sales to the Union in which the IBS rates are subject to the reduction referred to in item "a" of item I of § 1º of art. 473, the presumed
  credit of IBS referred to in § 1º of this article may be appropriated, considering, exclusively for purposes of calculating said presumed credit, the
  assessment of the debit balance of IBS based on the rates that would be applicable to the transaction had there been no reduction to zero. Effective as of a future date
        § 6º The application of the presumed credit of IBS referred to in § 1º of this article will observe the following:        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - the debit balance of the IBS, for each incentive percentage, is considered to be the balance assessed under the terms of the caput and of § 1º of art. 45 of this
  Complementary Law, excluding the presumed credit referred to in § 1º of this article; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         II - the incentive percentages will be applied to each IBS debit to reduce the amounts to be collected or paid under the extinction modes
  provided for in items III to V of the caput of art. 27 of this Complementary Law, with the appropriation of the credit assured;     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

       III - after the assessment of the debit balance of IBS referred to in item I of this paragraph, the presumed credit referred to in § 1º of this article will be deducted and,
  next, the deductions referred to in § 3º of art. 45 of this Complementary Law; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         IV - without prejudice to the other transfers provided for in this Complementary Law, in the event of a recoverable balance, assessed under the terms of § 3º
  of art. 45, the amounts of debits extinguished by the modes provided for in items III to V of the caput of art. 27 in the assessment period will be transferred to the incentivized
  industry, up to the limit of said recoverable balance, within up to 3 (three) business days counted from the date of completion of the assessment. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

        Art. 451. The CBS rates levied on transactions carried out by legal entities established in the Manaus Free Trade
  Zone with material goods of national origin or with services rendered in person, when directed to a natural or legal person located within said
  area, are reduced to zero.

        Sole paragraph. The taxpayer that carries out the transactions referred to in the caput may appropriate and use the credits relating to preceding transactions,
  observing the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

       Art. 452. The presumed credits of IBS and CBS established by arts. 444, 447, 449 and 450 of this Complementary Law may only be used for
  offset, respectively, against the amount of IBS and CBS owed by the taxpayer, with offset against other taxes and cash reimbursement prohibited.

       Sole paragraph. The right to use the presumed credits referred to in the caput extinguishes after 5 (five) years, counted from the first day of the month
  following that in which their appropriation occurs.

        Art. 453. Transactions with goods and services occurring within the Manaus Free Trade Zone or directed to said area, including imports, that are not
  covered by the provisions of arts. 443, 445, 446 and 448 of this Complementary Law are subject to the levy of the IBS and the CBS based on the other rules provided for
  in this Complementary Law.

       Art. 454. As of January 1, 2027, the IPI rates are reduced to zero for products subject to a rate lower than 6.5% (six whole and five
  tenths percent) provided for in the Table of Incidence of the Tax on Industrialized Products - Tipi in force on December 31, 2023, and that have:

        I - been industrialized in the Manaus Free Trade Zone in the year 2024; or

        II - a technical-economic project approved by the Administrative Council of Suframa (CAS) between January 1, 2022 and the date of publication of this Law.

        § 1º The following products will be benefited by a presumed CBS credit, under the terms of item I of § 2º of art. 450 of this Complementary Law:

        I - those referred to in the caput of this article; or

        II - (VETOED).

       § 2º The reduction to zero of the rates referred to in the caput of this article does not reach products classified as information and
  communication technology goods, in accordance with the regulation of art. 16-A of Law No. 8,248, of October 23, 1991.

         § 3º The Executive Branch of the Union will disclose the list of products whose IPI rate has been reduced to zero under the terms of this article and of art. 126, item III,
  subitem "a", of the ADCT.

        Art. 455. In relation to goods without a national equivalent whose production is to be installed in the Manaus Free Trade Zone:

         I - the presumed CBS credit referred to in art. 450 of this Complementary Law will be calculated by applying the percentage established by item I of §
  2º of said article; or

        II - the IPI rate will be at least 6.5% (six whole and five tenths percent), and the head of the Executive Branch of the Union may increase it or
  reinstate it, subject to the following conditions:

        a) the rate increase will be at most thirty percentage points;

        b) the rate resulting from reinstatement may not be lower than that provided for in item II of the caput of this article;

        c) the reduction or reinstatement may not be effected before 60 (sixty) months have elapsed from the setting or increase of the IPI rate;

        d) the reduction must be made gradually, limited to at most five percentage points per year.

         § 1º In the case of goods with a national equivalent whose production is to be installed in the Manaus Free Trade Zone, the tax incentives referred to
  in this Law are assured, except those provided for in items I and II of the caput of this article.

         § 2º The conditions provided for in item II of the caput and its subitems apply to products industrialized in the Manaus Free Trade Zone that have a positive
  IPI rate.

         Art. 456. The reduction in IBS and CBS revenue resulting from the benefits provided for in this Chapter, including as a result of the presumed credits
  provided for in arts. 444, 447, 449 and 450 of this Complementary Law, must be taken into account for the setting of the reference rates.

         Art. 457. The State of Amazonas may institute a matching contribution similar to those existing on December 31, 2023, provided that it is
  destined for financing higher education, promoting micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and the interiorization of development, in accordance with the provision of the caput
  of art. 92-B of the ADCT of the Federal Constitution, observing that:

        I - the percentage of the matching contribution provided for in the caput will be 1.5% (one and a half percent), calculated on the revenue of incentivized industries;

        II - the matching contribution referred to in the caput will be charged as of the year 2033, when the transition provided for in arts. 124 to 133 of the Act of
  Transitional Constitutional Provisions ends;

       III - in the year 2033, the collection of the matching contribution provided for in the caput will be equivalent to 10% (ten percent) of the percentage provided for in item I, with the
  remaining 90% (ninety percent) being borne by the recomposition provided for in art. 131, § 1º, II of the Act of Transitional Constitutional
  Provisions;

         IV - from 2034 to 2073, the percentage of the matching contribution collection provided for in the caput will be increased at the rate of 1/45 (one forty-fifth) per year in
  addition to the percentage applied in the year 2033, with the remainder being borne by the recomposition provided for in art. 131, § 1º, III of the Act of Transitional Constitutional
  Provisions.

                                                                                   CHAPTER II
                                                                     ON FREE TRADE AREAS

        Art. 458. The benefits relating to the Free Trade Areas established in this Chapter apply until the date established by art. 92-A of the ADCT.

        Art. 459. For purposes of the provisions of this Complementary Law, the following free trade areas are covered by a favored regime:

        I - Tabatinga, in Amazonas, created by Law No. 7,965, of December 22, 1989;

        II - Guajará-Mirim, in Rondônia, created by Law No. 8,210, of July 19, 1991;

        III - Boa Vista and Bonfim, in Roraima, created by Law No. 8,256, of November 25, 1991;

        IV - Macapá and Santana, in Amapá, created by art. 11 of Law No. 8,387, of December 30, 1991; and

        V - Brasiléia, extending to Epitaciolândia, and Cruzeiro do Sul, in Acre, created by Law No. 8,857, of March 8, 1994.

        Art. 460. Under terms defined in regulation, it is a condition for qualification for the tax incentives of the Free Trade Areas:

         I - the specific registration in the registry of the Superintendência da Zona Franca de Manaus - Suframa, for the legal entity that carries out commercial activity
  or the supply of services; and

        I - the specific registration in the registry of the Superintendência da Zona Franca de Manaus (Suframa), for the legal entity that carries out commercial
  activity or the supply of services or industrial activity not covered by the provision of item II of this article; and (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

         II - the specific registration and approval of a technical-economic project by the Administrative Council of Suframa for the development of an industrialization
  activity of products whose final composition predominantly consists of raw materials of regional origin, originating from the animal, vegetable,
  mineral segments, except for the ores of Chapter 26 of the NCM/SH, or agro-silvo-pastoral, subject to applicable environmental legislation.

         II - the specific registration and approval of a technical-economic project by the Administrative Council of Suframa for the development of an industrialization
  activity of products whose final composition predominantly consists of raw materials of regional origin, originating from the animal, vegetable,
  mineral segments, except for the ores of Chapter 26 of the NCM/SH, or agro-silvo-pastoral, subject to applicable environmental legislation, for a legal entity that carries out
  incentivized industrial activity. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 1º In the process of approving the projects referred to in this article, the Executive Branch of the State in which the Free Trade Area
  is located shall be heard.

         § 2º Suframa will regulate the criteria for characterizing the predominance of raw material of regional origin in the final composition of the product referred
  to in item II of the caput.

        Art. 461. The levy of the IBS and the CBS on the importation of material goods carried out by industry qualified in the manner of item II of the caput of art.
  460 of this Complementary Law and subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS for incorporation into its production process is suspended. Effective as of a future date

        § 1º The suspension referred to in the caput does not apply to imports of:

        I - goods referred to in art. 441 of this Complementary Law; and

         II - goods for personal use and consumption referred to in art. 57 of this Complementary Law, unless it is demonstrated that they are necessary for the
  development of the taxpayer's economic activity linked to the approved economic project.

        § 2º The suspension referred to in the caput converts into exemption:

        I - when the imported goods are consumed or incorporated into the importer's production process in the respective Free Trade Area;

         II - after the full depreciation of the good or its remaining in the fixed assets of the acquiring establishment for 48 (forty-eight) months, whichever
  occurs first.

         § 3º Should goods imported with the suspension referred to in the caput be sent outside the Free Trade Area before the conversion into exemption
  referred to in § 2º, the importer must collect the suspended taxes with the applicable legal additions, in the manner of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law, with
  the appropriation and use of credits permitted in the manner of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law in relation to amounts actually paid, except in relation to the
  applicable legal additions.

        Art. 462. A presumed credit of IBS relating to the importation of material goods for in-person resale in the Free Trade Area is granted to the taxpayer qualified in the manner of art. 460 and subject to the regular regime or to the Simples Nacional. Effective as of a future date

         § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying a percentage corresponding to 50% (fifty percent) of the IBS
  rate applicable on the import.

        § 2º The presumed credit referred to in this article must be deducted from the amount of IBS due on the import.

         § 3º To the importer of the goods referred to in the caput subject to the regular IBS regime, the appropriation and use of the full IBS credits is guaranteed for the
  amount of the tax levied on the import, observing the rules set forth in arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        § 4º The importer must collect IBS corresponding to the amount of the presumed credit deducted from the amount due on the import, with the applicable legal additions,
  in the manner of § 2º of art. 29, from the date of import, if:

        I - the resale does not comply with the requirement set forth in the caput;

        II - the entry of the good into the establishment of destination in the Free Trade Area is not proven within the time limits established in regulation; and

        II - the good is resold outside the Free Trade Area or transferred outside the Free Trade Area.

        § 5º (VETOED).

         Art. 463. The IBS and CBS rates levied on transactions originating outside the free trade area that direct industrialized material goods
  of national origin to a taxpayer established in the free trade area are reduced to zero, where such taxpayer is:

        I - qualified under the terms of art. 460 of this Complementary Law; and

       II - subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS or an opting member of the Simples Nacional regime referred to in art. 12 of Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14,
  2006.

        § 1º The provision of the caput does not apply to transactions with goods referred to in § 1º of art. 461 of this Complementary Law.



        § 2º The taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS that carries out the transactions referred to in the caput may appropriate and use credits relating to
  preceding transactions, observing the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

        § 3º Specific controls must be instituted for verification of the entry into the Free Trade Areas of the goods referred to in the caput, under the terms of the
  regulation.

         § 4º Should there be no proof that the goods destined for the Free Trade Areas entered their destination, within the time limits established in regulation, the
  taxpayer must collect the amount of IBS and CBS that would be due had there been no reduction of rates to zero, with the applicable legal additions under the
  terms of § 2º of art. 29 of this Complementary Law.

        Art. 464. The IBS will be levied on the entry, into the state in which the free trade area is located, of material goods that had been covered by the
  reduction of rates to zero under the terms of art. 463 of this Complementary Law, except where destined for incentivized industry for use in the Free Trade
  Areas.

        § 1º In the case referred to in the caput:

        I - the IBS taxpayer will be the recipient of the transaction referred to in the caput of art. 463 of this Complementary Law;

        II - the tax base will be the value of the transaction referred to in the caput of art. 463 of this Complementary Law;

       III - the IBS will be charged by applying a rate corresponding to 70% (seventy percent) of the rate that would be levied on the respective transaction had there
  been no reduction to zero established by art. 463 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2º The amount of IBS paid in the manner of item III of § 1º will allow the taxpayer to appropriate and use the tax credit, in the manner of arts. 47 to 56
  of this Complementary Law.

        § 3º The amount of IBS paid in the manner of § 4º of art. 463 of this Complementary Law will allow the taxpayer to appropriate and use the tax credit in the
  manner of arts. 47 to 57 of this Complementary Law, except in relation to legal additions.

        Art. 465. A presumed credit of IBS relating to the acquisition of industrialized material goods of national origin covered by the reduction to zero of the IBS
  rate under the terms of art. 463 of this Complementary Law is granted to the taxpayer subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS and qualified in the manner of art. 460 of this
  Complementary Law.       Effective as of a future date

        § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the following percentages on the value of the transaction covered by the
  reduction to zero of the IBS rate under the terms of art. 463 of this Complementary Law:

        I - 7.5% (seven whole and five tenths percent), in the case of goods originating from the South and Southeast regions, except from the State of Espírito Santo; and

        II - 13.5% (thirteen whole and five tenths percent), in the case of goods originating from the North, Northeast and Center-West regions and from the State of Espírito Santo.

        § 2º The presumed credit must be reversed if:

        I - the entry of the good into the establishment of destination in the Free Trade Area is not proven within the time limits established in regulation, requiring the
  applicable legal additions under the terms of § 2º of art. 29;

        II - the good is resold outside the Free Trade Area or transferred outside the Free Trade Area, with legal additions not required if the
  reversal is carried out in a timely manner.

       Art. 466. The CBS rates levied on transactions carried out by legal entities established in the Free Trade Area
  with material goods of national origin or services rendered in person, when directed to a natural or legal person located within said area, are reduced to zero.

        Sole paragraph. The taxpayer that carries out the transactions referred to in the caput may appropriate and use the credits relating to preceding transactions,
  observing the provisions of arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

         Art. 467. Presumed credits of CBS relating to transactions that direct to the national territory material goods produced by the industry itself in said area under
  the terms of the approved economic project are granted to industry subject to the regular regime of IBS and CBS and qualified in the manner of item II of the caput of art. 460 of this
  Complementary Law. Effective as of a future date            Effective as of a future date

       § 1º The presumed credit referred to in the caput will be calculated by applying the percentage of 6% (six percent) on the value of the transaction recorded on a
  valid tax document.

        § 2º The provision of the caput does not apply to transactions:

        I - not subject to levy or covered by cases of exemption, zero rate, suspension or deferral of the CBS;

        II - with goods referred to in art. 441 of this Complementary Law.

         § 3º To acquirers of the goods referred to in the caput, if subject to the regular regime of the IBS and the CBS, the full appropriation of the credits
  relating to the CBS is guaranteed for the amount levied on the transaction recorded on a valid tax document, observing the rules provided for in arts. 47 to 56 of this Complementary Law.

       Art. 468. The presumed credits of IBS and CBS established by arts. 462, 465 and 467 of this Complementary Law may only be used for
  offset, respectively, against amounts of IBS and CBS owed by the taxpayer, with offset against other taxes and cash reimbursement prohibited.

       Sole paragraph. The right to use the presumed credits referred to in the caput extinguishes after 5 (five) years, counted from the first day of the month
  following that in which their appropriation occurs.

        Art. 469. For purposes of this Chapter, in all transactions between related parties, the provision of § 4º of art. 12 of this Complementary Law will be observed.

         Art. 470. The reduction in IBS and CBS revenue resulting from the benefits provided for in this Section, including as a result of the presumed credits
  provided for in arts. 462, 465 and 467 of this Complementary Law, must be taken into account for the setting of the reference rates.

                                                                                 CHAPTER III

                                                      ON THE REFUND OF THE IBS AND THE CBS TO FOREIGN TOURISTS

                                                                                   BOOK III
                                                              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                        ON THE OTHER PROVISIONS

                                                                                   TITLE I

         ON THE MANAUS FREE TRADE ZONE, THE FREE TRADE AREAS, THE REFUND OF THE IBS AND THE CBS TO FOREIGN TOURISTS, THE
  NATIONAL TAX COMPLIANCE PROGRAM AND THE NON-TAX ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES RELATING TO THE COLLECTION
                                   OF TAXES IN FINANCIAL SETTLEMENT (SPLIT PAYMENT)
        Art. 471. A Joint Act of the Ministry of Finance and the IBS Management Committee may provide that the amount of the IBS and the CBS levied on the supply of
  material goods to a person domiciled or resident abroad, carried out in the Country during a stay of less than 90 (ninety) days, will be refunded to that person at the moment
  their departure from national territory occurs.

          § 1º The refund of the IBS and the CBS referred to in the caput will observe the following:

         I - it will apply only to goods acquired that are part of accompanied baggage, during the period of stay of the resident or person domiciled
  abroad, supplied by qualified taxpayers;

          II - it will apply only to departures by air or sea;

      III - physical proof may be requested that the good subject to the tax refund is included in the baggage of the person domiciled or resident abroad at the
  moment of their departure from national territory; and

          IV - a portion may be deducted from the refund amount for payment of the administrative costs related to the benefit referred to in this article.

          § 2º The Ministry of Finance and the IBS Management Committee will regulate the provisions of this article, including in relation to:

          I - other conditions to be observed for requesting the refund referred to in this article;

          II - the manner of qualification of IBS and CBS taxpayers referred to in item I of § 1º;

          III - the exchange rate applicable for purposes of the provision of item IV of this paragraph;

          IV - the limit of the refund, which may not be lower than US$ 1,000.00 (one thousand US dollars);

          V - the refund, which will have as a parameter the total value of goods acquired per person.

                                                                                     CHAPTER IV
                                                                  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                         ON THE NATIONAL TAX COMPLIANCE PROGRAM

         Art. 471-A. The National Tax Compliance Program (PNCT) is instituted, intended to integrate the tax compliance regimes of the IBS and the
  CBS, with a view to promoting legal certainty, predictability, transparency and the improvement of the relationship between tax administrations and taxpayers.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1º Adherence to the PNCT will be voluntary and will depend on compliance with objective criteria provided for in regulation.             (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

        § 2º The PNCT will be regulated by a joint act of the CGIBS and the RFB, subject to the provisions of this Complementary Law.                   (Included by Complementary Law
  No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 471-B. The PNCT will have as objectives:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - to encourage tax regularity of taxpayers through guidance and prevention mechanisms;           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        II - to promote the self-regularization of tax obligations, allowing taxpayers to regularize their situation before assessment; and          (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - to establish differentiated treatment for taxpayers with a compliance history.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 471-C. For participating taxpayers, the PNCT may provide for:        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - an extended period for compliance with ancillary obligations, as regulated;             (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         II - prioritization of the analysis of IBS and CBS refund requests, as defined in item I of § 3º of art. 39 of this Complementary Law;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         III - reduction of penalties for non-compliance with a principal or ancillary obligation, under the terms of § 1º of art. 341-H of this Complementary Law;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          IV - priority analysis of requests for rulings and tax guidance;   (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          V - reduction of documentary requirements and administrative procedures;          (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       VI - flexibility of the requirement to verify market value in transactions between related parties, under the terms of § 7º of art. 5º of this Complementary
  Law; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          VII - other incentives established in the regulation referred to in § 2º of art. 471-A.       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Sole paragraph. The provision of items II, III and V applies, in relation to the IBS and the CBS, exclusively within the scope of the PNCT."                    (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                                                                                     CHAPTER V
                                                                  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          ON THE NON-TAX ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES RELATING TO THE COLLECTION OF TAXES IN FINANCIAL SETTLEMENT (SPLIT
                                                              PAYMENT)

        Art. 471-D. The electronic payment service provider and the operating institution of payment systems are subject to the following non-tax
  administrative penalties relating to the execution and control of the collection of the IBS and the CBS in financial settlement (split payment): (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        I - failing to segregate or segregating in disagreement with the legislation the amounts relating to the IBS and the CBS: 0.1 (one tenth) of UPF per transaction;              (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - failing to collect or collecting late, or in a smaller amount, the segregated amounts of IBS and CBS: a late-payment fine corresponding to the application of 3% (three
  percent) per month or fraction thereof on the amount not collected, collected late or collected in a smaller amount; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       III - communicating late or in disagreement with the legislation the information relating to segregation and collection carried out: 0.001 (one thousandth) of
  UPF per transaction, per day or fraction of a day of delay. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)



        § 1º The liability of the payment service provider and the operating institution of payment systems is excluded when the infraction was
  caused by information not provided or provided incorrectly by the supplier, the acquirer, the digital platform or another person or
  entity without legal personality that receives the payment, under the terms of § 2º of art. 32 of this Complementary Law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

        § 2º The fines provided for in this article will be increased by late-payment interest equivalent to the Selic rate, accumulated monthly, calculated from the first
  day of the month following that of the occurrence of the infraction, until the month prior to that of payment, and by 1% (one percent) in the month of payment. (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 3º A joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS will establish, for each of the penalties referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article, a tolerance
  limit for the percentage of nonconforming transactions each month, which may not be lower than 0.01% (one hundredth of one percent) nor higher than:
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - 1% (one percent) in the first 24 (twenty-four) months counted from January 1, 2027; and         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

          II - 0.5% (five tenths of one percent) after the period referred to in item I of this paragraph.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 4º The penalties referred to in items I and III of the caput of this article will be reduced by 100% (one hundred percent) if the percentage of
  nonconforming transactions is lower than the tolerance limit defined by the joint act referred to in § 3º of this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       Art. 471-E. The repeated practice of the infractions referred to in art. 471-D constitutes a violation of the rules regulating the financial and
  payment system and gives rise to the application of penalties by the competent regulatory body, without prejudice to the fines referred to in art. 471-D. (Included
  by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 1º For purposes of the provision of this article, the following characterize repeated practice of infractions:     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       I - non-compliance with the provisions of items I, II or III of the caput of art. 471-D in relation to 10% (ten percent) or more of the total number of transactions
  in the month, in 2 (two) successive or alternating months, in each 12 (twelve)-month period; or (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        II - non-compliance with the provisions of items I or II of the caput of art. 471-D in relation to 10% (ten percent) or more of the total value of the transactions in the month,
  in 2 (two) successive or alternating months, in each 12 (twelve)-month period. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 2º In the case of this article:    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - the regulatory body referred to in the caput may apply the following penalties:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) temporary suspension of authorization to provide financial or payment services;           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) revocation of the authorization to operate;        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - the CGIBS and the RFB may, by joint act:       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          a) declare the CNPJ registration inapt; or      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          b) suspend the CNPJ.      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 471-F. The payment service provider or the operating institution of the payment system may challenge the penalty applied, within a period of
  up to 20 (twenty) business days, counted from notification of the infraction, in a petition addressed to the RFB, in relation to the CBS, and to the CGIBS, in relation to the
  IBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         § 1º From the decision of the reviewing body referred to in the caput of this article, a hierarchical appeal may be filed a single time, within a period of 10 (ten) business
  days, counted from notice of the appealed decision, to the hierarchical authority immediately above, which will decide definitively. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2º In the event the appeal is considered unfounded, the payment service provider or the operating institution of the payment system
  has a period of up to 20 (twenty) business days, counted from the decision, to make payment of the fines provided for in art. 471-D. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

                                                                                      TITLE II

                                                                        ON GOVERNMENT PURCHASES

        Art. 472. In acquisitions of goods and services by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations, the IBS and CBS rates will be
  reduced, uniformly, in proportion to the reducer set:

        Art. 472. In acquisitions of goods and services by a legal entity governed by internal public law, the IBS and CBS rates will be reduced, uniformly,
  in proportion to the reducer set: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          I - from 2027 to 2033, under the terms of art. 370 of this Complementary Law; and

          II - as of 2034, at the level set for 2033.

          Sole paragraph. The provision of this article does not apply to acquisitions that, cumulatively, are made in person and are exempt from
  competitive bidding, under the terms of specific legislation.

          Sole paragraph. The provision of this article does not apply in the following cases:         (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - acquisitions that, cumulatively, are made in person and are exempt from competitive bidding, under the terms of specific legislation;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         II - acquisitions subject to the nationally uniform rates referred to in arts. 174, 175, 189, 212, 236, 237, 243, 246, items II and III of § 4º of
  art. 293, items II and III of the caput of art. 294, items I and II of the caput of art. 485, § 1º of art. 486 and § 2º of art. 487, all of this Complementary Law; or (Included by the
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       III - acquisitions subject to the regimes of the Simples Nacional or the Individual Micro-Entrepreneur (MEI), referred to in Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14,
  2006. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         Art. 473. The proceeds from the collection of the IBS and the CBS on acquisitions of goods and services by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public
  foundations will be fully allocated to the contracting federative entity, by reducing to zero the IBS and CBS rates owed to the other federative entities and
  equivalently increasing the rate of the tax owed to the contracting entity.

          § 1º For purposes of compliance with the provision of the caput of this article:

          I - in acquisitions by the Union:


          a) the IBS rates of the other federative entities will be reduced to zero; and

         b) the CBS rate will be set at an amount equivalent to the sum of the IBS and CBS rates levied on the transaction, after the reduction referred to in
  art. 472 of this Complementary Law;

          II - in acquisitions by a State:

          a) the CBS rate and the municipal IBS rate will be reduced to zero; and

         b) the state IBS rate will be set at an amount equivalent to the sum of the IBS and CBS rates levied on the transaction, after the reduction referred to
  in art. 472 of this Complementary Law;

          III - in acquisitions by a Municipality:

          a) the CBS rate and the state IBS rate will be reduced to zero;

         b) the municipal IBS rate will be set at an amount equivalent to the sum of the IBS and CBS rates levied on the transaction, after the reduction
  referred to in art. 472 of this Complementary Law; and

          IV - in acquisitions by the Federal District:

          a) the CBS rate will be reduced to zero;

         b) the district IBS rate will be set at an amount equivalent to the sum of the IBS and CBS rates levied on the transaction, after the reduction referred to
  in art. 472 of this Complementary Law.

          § 2º The provision of the caput and of § 1º of this article does not apply to acquisitions that, cumulatively, are made in person and are exempt
  from competitive bidding, under the terms of specific legislation.

        § 3º The provision of this article applies to imports made by the direct public administration, by autarchies and by public foundations, ensuring
  equal treatment in relation to acquisitions within the Country.

          § 4º In acquisitions made by a public consortium with legal personality under public law:      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         I - the rates will be set in the manner of § 1º of this article, treating the acquisition as equivalent to one made by the Municipality of the consortium's seat;
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

         II - the proceeds from the collection of the IBS and the CBS will be fully allocated to the federative entities that are members of the public consortium, in proportion to
  their participation in the financing of the acquisition made; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - the tax document will be issued in the name of the public consortium.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 5º Subject to the criteria established in a joint act of the CGIBS and the RFB, for purposes of the provision of item II of § 4º of this article, the public
  consortium must inform the CGIBS and, where applicable, the RFB of the proportion of each federative entity's participation in the financing of the acquisition made. (Included by
  Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 6º For purposes of the provision of this article, the treatment given to public consortiums applies to the CGIBS.         (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

                                                                                         TITLE III

                                                                             TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

         Art. 474. During the period between 2027 and 2032, the percentages for the levy or crediting of IBS and CBS provided for in arts. 447, § 1º,
  449, § 1º, and 465, § 1º, of this Complementary Law will be reduced in the following proportions: Effective as of a future date

          I - 9/10 (nine tenths), in 2029;

          II - 8/10 (eight tenths), in 2030;

          III - 7/10 (seven tenths), in 2031; and

          IV - 6/10 (six tenths), in 2032.

                                                                                        CHAPTER I

                                                                              ON THE FIVE-YEAR REVIEW
       Art. 475. The Executive Branch of the Union and the IBS Management Committee shall carry out a five-year assessment of the efficiency, effectiveness and
  results, as social, environmental and economic development policies, of:

        I - the application to the IBS and to the CBS of the special customs regimes, of the export processing zones and of the capital goods regimes of Reporto,
  of Reidi and of Renaval, dealt with in Title II of Book I;

          II - the personalized refund of the IBS and of the CBS, dealt with in Chapter I of Title III of Book I;

          III - the National Basic Food Basket, dealt with in Chapter II of Title III of Book I;

          IV - the differentiated regimes of the IBS and of the CBS, dealt with in Title IV of Book I; and

          V - the specific regimes of the IBS and of the CBS, dealt with in Title V of Book I.

        § 1 The assessment referred to in the caput must consider, including, the impact of the IBS and CBS legislation on the promotion of equality between men and
  women and ethnic-racial equality.

          § 2 For purposes of the provision in item II of the caput, the assessment referred to in the caput must consider the impact on income inequalities.

        § 3 For purposes of the provision in item III of the caput, the composition of the products that make up the National Basic Food Basket must have as its
  objective to guarantee healthy and nutritionally adequate food, in observance of the social right to food, and must satisfy the following criteria:

          I - to favor fresh or minimally processed foods; and

          II - to favor foods consumed mostly by low-income families.

          § 4 For purposes of the provision in § 3, the following are considered:
         I - fresh or minimally processed foods, those obtained directly from plants, animals or fungi and acquired for consumption without having
  undergone alterations after leaving nature or having been subjected to minimal processing without the addition of salt, sugar, fat and oils and other
  additives that modify the characteristics of the product, and substances of rare culinary use;

        II - foods consumed mostly by low-income families, those that present the highest ratios between:

        a) the share of spending on the respective food in the total food spending of low-income families; and

        b) the share of spending on the respective food in the total food spending of other families.

         § 5 For purposes of calculating the ratio referred to in item II of § 4, the information from the POF (Household Budget Survey) of the IBGE shall be used and,
  for the delimitation of low-income families, the reference shall be the limit of monthly per capita family income of up to half a minimum wage.

        § 6 For purposes of the provision in item IV of the caput, for purposes of the differentiated taxation regime, the definition of foods intended for human
  consumption must favor fresh or minimally processed foods, except those consumed mostly by high-income families.

        § 7 The Federal Audit Court (Tribunal de Contas da União) and the State and Municipal Audit Courts may, as a result of the exercise of their duties, offer
  input for the five-year assessment referred to in this article.

        § 7 The Federal Audit Court and the State, Federal District and Municipal Audit Courts, as a result of the exercise of
  their duties, and civil society, through its sectoral entities, may offer input for the five-year assessment referred to in this article.
  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8 If the five-year assessment results in recommendations to revise the regimes and policies dealt with in the items of the caput, the Executive Branch of the
  Union must send to the National Congress a complementary bill proposing:

        I - changes in the scope and manner of application of the regimes and policies dealt with in the items of the caput; and

        II - a transition regime to the standard rate, in relation to the differentiated regimes referred to in item IV of the caput.

          § 9 The first five-year assessment shall be carried out based on the data available in the 2030 calendar year and may result in the submission of a
  complementary bill by the Executive Branch of the Union, taking effect starting in 2032, to be sent by the last business day of March 2031.

        § 10. In the five-year assessment referred to in § 9, the reference rates of the IBS and CBS to be applied from 2033 shall be estimated,
  taking into account the collection data of these taxes in relation to the years 2026 to 2030.

       § 10. In the five-year assessment referred to in § 9, the reference rates of the IBS and CBS in 2033 shall be estimated.               (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 11. If the sum of the estimated reference rates referred to in § 10 results in a percentage higher than 26.5% (twenty-six point five
  percent), the Executive Branch of the Union, having heard the IBS Management Committee, must send to the National Congress a complementary bill proposing measures
  to reduce the percentage to a level equal to or lower than 26.5% (twenty-six point five percent).

        § 12. The complementary bill referred to in § 11 must:

        I - be sent to the National Congress within 90 (ninety) days after the conclusion of the five-year assessment;

        II - be accompanied by the data and calculations that supported its submission; and

        III - change the scope and manner of application of the regimes and policies dealt with in the items of the caput.

        § 13. Subsequent assessments shall take place every 5 (five) years, counted from the deadlines set forth in § 9.

         Art. 476. The Executive Branch of the Union shall carry out a five-year assessment of the efficiency, effectiveness and results, as a social, environmental and health
  policy, of the levy of the Selective Tax dealt with in Book II.

        § 1 The assessment referred to in this article shall be carried out simultaneously with the assessment referred to in art. 475 of this Complementary Law.

        § 2 The provision in art. 475 of this Complementary Law applies to the assessment referred to in this article, as applicable.

                                                                                  CHAPTER II

         ON THE COMPENSATION FOR ANY REDUCTION IN THE AMOUNT DELIVERED UNDER ART. 159, ITEMS I AND II, OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION
                                      DUE TO THE REPLACEMENT OF THE IPI BY THE SELECTIVE TAX

          Art. 477. Starting in 2027, the Union shall compensate, in the manner set forth in this Title, any reduction in the amount of the amounts delivered under art. 159, items I and
  II, of the Federal Constitution, due to the replacement of IPI collection by Selective Tax collection, as provided in this Complementary Law.

        § 1 The compensation referred to in the caput shall be calculated monthly, starting in January 2027, by the difference between:

        I - the reference value for the month, calculated under the terms of art. 478 of this Complementary Law; and

        II - the amount delivered, in the month, as a result of the application of the provisions of items I and II of the caput of art. 159 of the Federal Constitution to the proceeds of the
  collection of the IPI and of the Selective Tax.

        § 2 The amount calculated under the terms of § 1:

        I - when negative, shall be deducted from the amount calculated under § 1 in the subsequent month;

        II - when positive, shall be delivered in the second month following the calculation, in the manner provided for in items I and II of the caput of art. 159 of the Federal
  Constitution.

         § 3 The amount referred to in item II of § 2 shall be delivered on the same dates set for the delivery of the funds referred to in items I and II of the caput of
  art. 159 of the Federal Constitution, observing its distribution in equal amounts for each of the installments delivered in the month.

        Art. 478. The reference value referred to in item I of § 1 of art. 477 of this Complementary Law shall be calculated as follows:

        I - for the months of January to December 2027, it shall correspond to the average monthly value for 2026, calculated under the terms of § 1 of this article, adjusted for the
  variation of the IPCA up to the month of calculation and increased by 2% (two percent);

       II - starting in January 2028, it shall be set at a value equivalent to the reference value of the twelfth prior month, adjusted for the 12-month (twelve)
  variation of the proceeds of CBS collection, calculated based on the reference rate.

         § 1 The average monthly value at 2026 prices corresponds to the sum of the amounts delivered from 2022 to 2026 as a result of the application of the provisions of items I
  and II of the caput of art. 159 of the Federal Constitution to the proceeds of IPI collection, adjusted to 2026 prices by the variation in IPI collection and divided
  by 60 (sixty).

        § 2 The adjustment for the IPCA variation referred to in item I of the caput shall be made based on:

        I - the IPCA index for the respective month of calculation; and

        II - the average IPCA index for 2026.

        § 3 The Federal Audit Court shall publish, by the last business day of the month following the calculation, the reference value referred to in the caput.

         Art. 479. The amount to be delivered as compensation referred to in art. 477 of this Complementary Law shall observe the same criteria, deadlines and guarantees
  applicable to the delivery of funds referred to in art. 159, items I and II, of the Federal Constitution.

        § 1 It is prohibited to earmark the compensation funds referred to in the caput to any agency, fund or expense, except:

        I - the performance of tax administration activities;

        II - the provision of guarantees for credit operations secured by anticipated revenue;

        III - the payment of debts owed to the Union and to provide it with guarantee or counter-guarantee;

        IV - the minimum percentages for health actions and services provided for in art. 198, § 2, of the Federal Constitution;

        V - the minimum percentages to be applied to the maintenance and development of education under art. 212 of the Federal Constitution; and

        VI - the portion earmarked for the maintenance and development of basic education and for the fair compensation of its professionals, under art.
  212-A of the Federal Constitution.

       § 2 It is prohibited to withhold or place any restriction on the delivery and use of the compensation funds referred to in the caput to the States, the Federal District and
  the Municipalities, under art. 160 of the Federal Constitution.

                                                                                 CHAPTER III

                                                                          ON THE IBS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

                                                                                    Section I

                                                                              General Provisions

         Art. 480. The Management Committee of the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS Management Committee, CGIBS) is hereby established, by December 31, 2025, a public entity with a technical and
  operational character under a special regime, with headquarters and jurisdiction in the Federal District, endowed with technical, administrative, budgetary and financial independence. Taking effect

        § 1 The CGIBS, under the terms of the Federal Constitution and of this Complementary Law, shall have its actions characterized by the absence of any binding, guardianship or
  hierarchical subordination to any public administration body.

        § 2 The single IBS regulation shall define the maximum time limit for carrying out administrative collection activities, provided it does not exceed 12 (twelve)
  months, counted from the definitive constitution of the tax credit, after which the tax administration shall forward the matter to the respective attorney's office, for the applicable
  judicial or extrajudicial collection measures, under the terms defined in said regulation.

         § 3 The CGIBS, the Special Secretariat of the Brazilian Federal Revenue Service and the Attorney General's Office of the National Treasury may implement integrated solutions for
  the future administration and collection of the IBS and CBS.

        § 4 The rules common to the IBS and CBS contained in the single IBS regulation shall be approved by joint act of the CGIBS and of the federal Executive Branch.

         § 5 The single IBS regulation shall provide for uniform rules on tax compliance, guidance, self-regularization and differentiated treatment for
  taxpayers who meet the IBS compliance programs established by the federative entities.

         § 6 The biddings and contracting carried out by the CGIBS shall be governed by the general rules on bidding and contracting applicable to the direct, autarchic
  and foundational public administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities.

         § 7 The CGIBS shall observe the principle of publicity, through the disclosure of its normative acts, preferably by electronic means, made available on the
  internet.

                                                                                    Section II

                                                                       On the CGIBS Superior Council

        Art. 481. The CGIBS Superior Council, the highest deliberative body of the CGIBS, has the following composition:           Taking effect

        I - 27 (twenty-seven) members and their respective alternates, representing each State and the Federal District; and

        II - 27 (twenty-seven) members and their respective alternates, representing the Municipalities and the Federal District as a whole.

        § 1 The members and their respective alternates referred to:

        I - in item I of the caput of this article shall be appointed by the Head of the Executive Branch of each State and of the Federal District; and

        II - in item II of the caput of this article shall be appointed by the Heads of the Executive Branches of the Municipalities and of the Federal District, as follows:

        a) 14 (fourteen) representatives elected based on the votes of each Municipality and of the Federal District, with equal weight for all; and

        b) 13 (thirteen) representatives elected based on the votes of each Municipality and of the Federal District, weighted by their respective populations.

          § 2 The selection of the representatives of the Municipalities on the CGIBS Superior Council, referred to in item II of the caput of this article, shall be carried out by
  holding separate elections to determine the members and respective alternates of each of the groups referred to in items "a" and "b" of item II of § 1 of this
  article.

        § 2 The selection of the representatives of the Municipalities on the CGIBS Superior Council, referred to in item II of the caput of this article, shall be carried out,
  exceptionally for purposes of the installation of the provisional CGIBS referred to in the caput of art. 480 of this Complementary Law, by appointment by the National
  Confederation of Municipalities (CNM) and by the National Front of Mayors (FNP). (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3 The election referred to in § 2 of this article: (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
        I - shall be carried out electronically, it being observed that only the sitting Head of the Municipal Executive Branch shall have the right to vote;


          II - shall guarantee the representation of at least 1 (one) Municipality from each region of the Country, and the Federal District may represent the Center-
  West Region;
        III - shall be governed by the democratic principle, guaranteeing the participation of all Municipalities, without prejudice to the observance of minimum requirements for
  candidacy, under the terms of this Complementary Law and of the electoral regulation;
        IV - shall be carried out through a single electoral process, organized by the nationwide municipal representation associations, recognized
  under Law No. 14,341, of May 18, 2022, whose members represent at least 30% (thirty percent) of the Country's population or 30% (thirty percent)
  of the Country's Municipalities, by means of their own electoral regulation drawn up jointly by the entities.

        § 3 (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 4 The Municipalities may only appoint, among the members referred to in item II of the caput of this article, 1 (one) single sitting or alternate
  member, including for the electoral process.

        § 4 The Municipalities may only appoint, among the members referred to in item II of the caput of this article, 1 (one) single sitting or
  alternate member. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 5 Each association, referred to in item IV of § 3, for the election provided for in § 2, in relation to the representatives referred to in item "a" of item II of § 1
  of this article, shall submit up to one slate, which must have the minimum support of 20% (twenty percent) of the total Municipalities of the Country, containing 14
  (fourteen) sitting names, observing the following:

        § 5 The CNM shall appoint the representatives referred to in item "a" of item II of § 1 of this article, and the FNP the representatives referred to in item "b" of item II
  of § 1 of this article, observing the following: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        I - the names appointed and the respective Municipalities shall make up a single slate, and may not appear on another slate;

        II - each sitting member shall have 2 (two) alternates, necessarily from distinct Municipalities and observing the provision in item I of this paragraph;

        III - in the event the sitting member is unable to act, the first alternate shall immediately replace him;

        IV - the slate that obtains more than 50% (fifty percent) of the valid votes shall win the election;

       V - if none of the slates reaches the percentage of votes indicated in item IV of this paragraph, a second round of voting shall be held with the 2 (two)
  most-voted slates, in which case the slate that obtains the majority of the valid votes shall be considered the winner.

        VI - the appointments of each entity shall be approved in advance by the highest deliberative body of the respective municipal representation
  association, with broad publicity, respecting the right of participation of non-member Municipalities. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 5-A. If one of the municipal representation associations fails to submit the appointments as provided for in § 5 of this article by October 31,
  2025, the other association may appoint the representatives in its place. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 6 Each association, referred to in item IV of § 3, for the election provided for in § 2, in relation to the representatives referred to in item "b" of item II of § 1
  of this article, shall submit up to one slate, which must have the support of Municipalities representing at least 20% (twenty percent) of the total
  population of the Country, containing 13 (thirteen) sitting names, observing the provisions of the items of § 5 of this article.         (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of
  2026)

        § 6 (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 7 The member elected under §§ 5 and 6 of this article may be: (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)
          I - replaced, in the manner defined by the CGIBS, by decision of the majority:
          a) of the votes of the Municipalities of the Country, when it concerns the representatives referred to in item "a" of item II of § 1 of this article; or
          b) of the votes of the Municipalities of the Country weighted by their respective populations, when it concerns the representatives referred to in item "b" of
  item II of § 1 of this article;
          II - removed by act of the Head of the Executive Branch of the Municipality that appointed him.

        § 7 (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 8 In the event of removal of the sitting member and the respective alternates, a new election shall be held to fill the respective vacancies, within the period provided
  for by the internal rules of the CGIBS. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 8 (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 9 Except in the first election, provided for in § 2 of this article, the other elections shall be monitored throughout the entire electoral process by 4 (four)
  members of the CGIBS Superior Council, chosen by the 27 (twenty-seven) representatives of the Municipalities referred to in item II of the caput of this article.
  (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 9 (Repealed).     (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 10. The electoral regulation may define other duties of the members referred to in § 9 of this article for monitoring the electoral process.
  (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 10. (Repealed).    (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 11. It is prohibited to appoint representatives of the same Municipality simultaneously to the group of 14 (fourteen) representatives referred to in item "a"
  of item II of § 1 of this article and to the group of 13 (thirteen) representatives referred to in item "b" of said item.

        § 12. The competent venue to resolve judicial actions related to the electoral processes referred to in this article is that of the judicial district of Brasília, in the Federal
  District.

         Art. 482. The members of the CGIBS Superior Council shall be chosen from among citizens of unblemished reputation and notorious knowledge of tax
  administration, observing the following: Taking effect

         I - the sitting representation of the States and of the Federal District shall be exercised by the holder of the office of Secretary of Finance, Treasury, Taxation or a
  similar office corresponding to the highest tax administration authority of the said federative entities; and

         II - the representation of the Municipalities and of the Federal District shall be exercised by a member who does not maintain, during the representation, a hierarchical
  subordination relationship with a federative sphere different from the one that appointed him and who meets at least one of the following requirements:

        a) holding the office of Secretary of Finance, Treasury, Taxation or a similar office corresponding to the highest tax administration authority of the
  Municipality or of the Federal District;

        b) having at least 10 (ten) years of experience in the tax administration of the Municipality or of the Federal District;

       c) having at least 4 (four) years of experience holding senior management, leadership or advisory positions in the tax administration
  of the Municipality or of the Federal District.


        § 1 The members referred to in the caput of this article must, cumulatively:

        I - hold higher education qualifications compatible with the office for which they were appointed;

        II - not fall within the cases of ineligibility provided for in items "a" to "q" of item I of the caput of art. 1 of Complementary Law No. 64, of May 18,
  1990.

        § 2 The members of the CGIBS Superior Council shall be appointed and inducted to hold office for the period referred to in the caput of art. 480 and
  may be replaced or removed:

        I - in relation to the representation of the States and of the Federal District, by the Head of the Executive Branch;    (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       II - in relation to the representation of the Municipalities and of the Federal District, in the manner provided for in § 7 of art. 481 of this Complementary Law; and       (Repealed by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - due to resignation, a final and unappealable court conviction or a dismissal penalty resulting from a disciplinary administrative proceeding.

        § 3 The alternate shall replace the sitting member in his absences and impediments, in the manner set forth in the internal rules.

        § 4 In the event of a vacancy, the office shall be held by the respective alternate for the remaining period, except in cases of replacement.

        § 5 The member of the CGIBS Superior Council inducted into office based on item "a" of item II of the caput of this article who ceases to hold
  the office of Secretary of Finance, Treasury, Taxation or similar must be replaced or removed within 10 (ten) days, counted from the date of dismissal,
  if he does not meet another requirement to be a member of the CGIBS Superior Council. (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        Art. 482-A. The provisions of arts. 480 to 482 apply only to the provisional CGIBS provided for in the caput of art. 480.        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

       § 1 The terms of office of the representatives appointed under §§ 2, 5 and 5-A of art. 481 shall extend until March 31, 2027.                  (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 2 In the event the electoral regulation has not been approved and published by joint act of the CNM and of the FNP by January 31, 2027, it shall fall to the
  CGIBS to regulate and conduct the first election. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                   Section III

                                                                    On the Installation of the Superior Council

         Art. 483. The CGIBS Superior Council shall be installed within 120 (one hundred and twenty) days counted from the date of publication of this Complementary Law.        Taking
  effect

        § 1 For purposes of the provision in the caput of this article:

       I - the sitting and alternate members of the CGIBS Superior Council must be appointed within 90 (ninety) days counted from the date of publication of this
  Complementary Law, through publication in the Federal Official Gazette:

        a) by the Heads of the respective Executive Branches, in the case of the States and of the Federal District; or

        b) under the terms of the electoral process provided for in this Complementary Law, in the case of the Municipalities and of the Federal District;

       b) under the terms provided for in §§ 2, 4 and 5 of art. 481 of this Complementary Law, in the case of the Municipalities and of the Federal District;           (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - for the first term of the CGIBS Superior Council, the sitting and alternate members appointed shall be considered inducted:

        a) on the first business day of the second week following publication in the Federal Official Gazette of the appointment of all members; or

        b) on the date referred to in the caput of this article, if the appointment of all members has not been published;

        III - the sitting members of the CGIBS Superior Council shall elect among themselves the President and the 2 (two) Vice-Presidents of the CGIBS; and

        IV - the President of the CGIBS shall notify the Minister of State for Finance of the installation of the CGIBS Superior Council, indicating the bank account intended
  to receive the initial contribution from the Union through the credit operation referred to in art. 484 of this Complementary Law.

       § 2 Until the contribution from the Union referred to in art. 484 of this Complementary Law is made, the expenses necessary for the operation of the Superior Council of the
  CGIBS shall be borne by the entities of origin of the respective members.

        § 2 Until the contribution from the Union referred to in art. 484 of this Complementary Law is made, the expenses necessary for the operation of the Superior Council of the
  CGIBS shall be borne by the entities of origin of the respective members, and shall be reimbursed by the CGIBS, starting in fiscal year 2026, increased by
  remuneration based on the Selic rate from the dates the expenses were paid until their respective reimbursement to the federative entities.         (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 3 After receiving the contribution from the Union referred to in art. 484 of this Complementary Law, the CGIBS Superior Council shall adopt the measures necessary
  for the installation and operation of the CGIBS.

        § 4 The internal rules of the CGIBS shall establish the means to carry out its financial and accounting management while its own budget execution system
  is not made available.

         § 5 For purposes of enabling budgetary, financial, accounting, operational and asset management, while its own Unified and
  Integrated Budget Execution, Financial Administration and Control System (Siafic) is not structured, the CGIBS may enter into a technical cooperation agreement with 1 (one) or more
  federative entities, aimed at making available, developing, customizing, maintaining and hosting the Siafic, as well as other
  structuring systems necessary for the performance of its functions, and the costs arising from said technical cooperation agreements shall be reimbursed by the CGIBS, increased by
  remuneration based on the Selic rate from the dates the expenses were paid until their respective reimbursement to the federative entities.
  (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         Art. 484. The Union shall fund, through a credit operation in 2025, the amount of R$ 600,000,000.00 (six hundred million reais), reduced by 1/12 (one-twelfth)
  per month elapsed up to, and including, the month in which the notification referred to in item IV of § 1 of art. 483 of this Complementary Law is given. Taking
  effect

        Art. 484. The Union shall fund, through a credit operation, the expenses necessary for the installation of the CGIBS, in the period from 2025 to 2028, in the amount of
  up to R$ 3,800,000,000.00 (three billion eight hundred million reais), distributed as follows: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       I - in 2025, in the amount of R$ 600,000,000.00 (six hundred million reais), reduced by 1/12 (one-twelfth) per month elapsed up to, and including, the
  month in which the notification referred to in item IV of § 1 of art. 483 of this Complementary Law is given; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)


        II - in 2026, in the amount of R$ 800,000,000.00 (eight hundred million reais);     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        III - in 2027, in the amount of R$ 1,200,000,000.00 (one billion two hundred million reais); and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        IV - in 2028, in the amount of R$ 1,200,000,000.00 (one billion two hundred million reais).       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       § 1 The amounts to be financed by the Union shall be distributed in equal and successive monthly installments, from January 2025 or the month following the
  notification referred to in item IV of § 1 of art. 483 of this Complementary Law until the last month of the year.

        § 1 The amounts to be financed by the Union shall be distributed in equal and successive monthly installments:         (Wording given by Complementary Law No.
  227 of 2026)

       I - in 2025, from January 2025 or the month following the notification referred to in item IV of § 1 of art. 483 of this Complementary Law until the last
  month of the year; and (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - from 2026 to 2028, in 12 (twelve) installments.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

          § 2 The monthly installments referred to in this article shall be credited by the tenth day of each month, observing, in the case of the first installment, the minimum period of
  30 (thirty) days between the notification made under item IV of § 1 of art. 483 of this Complementary Law and the date of the credit.

        § 3 The Union's financing to the CGIBS carried out under this article shall be remunerated based on the Selic rate from the date of disbursement until its
  reimbursement to the Union.

        § 4 The CGIBS shall reimburse the Union for the amounts financed under this article in 20 (twenty) successive semiannual installments, starting in June
  2029.

        § 5 The CGIBS shall provide a guarantee in favor of the Union in an amount equal to or greater than the amount owed as a result of the credit operation referred to in this article, which
  may consist of the proceeds of IBS collection earmarked for its financing.

        § 5 The CGIBS shall provide a guarantee in favor of the Union in an amount equal to or greater than the amount owed as a result of the credit operation referred to in this article,
  which may consist of: (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         I - the proceeds of IBS collection earmarked for the financing of the CGIBS, allowing, for fiscal years 2029 to 2038, the additional earmarking of the
  proceeds of IBS collection of each federative entity, exclusively for the payment of the reimbursement referred to in § 4 of this article, at percentages of
  up to:(Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        a) 1% (one percent) in fiscal year 2029;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        b) 0.5% (five tenths of a percent) in fiscal year 2030;      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        c) 0.33% (thirty-three hundredths of a percent) in fiscal year 2031;    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        d) 0.25% (twenty-five hundredths of a percent) in fiscal year 2032; and     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        e) 0.1% (one tenth of a percent) in the period from 2033 to 2038; and       (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the yields from financial investments of the CGIBS's own revenues.     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 6 The CGIBS shall be subject to oversight by the Federal Audit Court exclusively in relation to the funds referred to in this article, until its
  full reimbursement.

                                                                                CHAPTER IV

                                                  ON THE TRANSITION PERIOD FOR TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING REAL ESTATE

                                                                                   Section I

                                                          On Transactions Initiated before January 1, 2029

                                                                                 Subsection I

                                                                              On Development (Incorporação)

        Art. 485. The taxpayer who carries out a real estate development (incorporação imobiliária) subject to the segregated estate (patrimônio de afetação), under the terms of articles 31-A to 31-E of Law No. 4,591, of December 16,
  1964, who has requested the option for the specific regime established by art. 1 and has had the request made effective under the terms of art. 2, both
  of Federal Law No. 10,931 of 2004, before January 1, 2029, may opt for the payment of CBS, as follows:

        Art. 485. The taxpayer who carries out a real estate development subject to the segregated estate, under the terms of arts. 31-A to 31-E of Law No. 4,591, of December 16,
  1964, who has requested the option for the specific regime established by art. 1 and has had the request made effective under the terms of art. 2,
  both of Law No. 10,931 of August 2, 2004, before January 1, 2029, may opt for the payment of IBS and of CBS, as follows:         (Wording
  given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

       I - the real estate development subject to the special taxation regime provided for in arts. 4 and 8 of Federal Law No. 10,931/2004 shall be subject to the payment
  of CBS in an amount equivalent to 2.08% of the monthly revenue received;

       I - the real estate development subject to the special taxation regime provided for in arts. 4 and 8 of Law No. 10,931, of August 2, 2004, shall be subject to the
  payment of IBS and of CBS in an amount equivalent to 2.08% (two point zero eight percent) of the monthly revenue received; (Wording given by Complementary
  Law No. 227 of 2026)

        II - the real estate development subject to the special taxation regime provided for in § 6 and § 8 of art. 4 and the sole paragraph of art. 8 of Federal Law No.
  10,931/2004 shall be subject to the payment of CBS in an amount equivalent to 0.53% of the monthly revenue received.

        II - the real estate development subject to the special taxation regime provided for in §§ 6 and 8 of art. 4 and in the sole paragraph of art. 8 of Law No. 10,931,
  of August 2, 2004, shall be subject to the payment of IBS and of CBS in an amount equivalent to 0.53% (fifty-three hundredths of a percent) of the monthly revenue
  received. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 1 The option for the special regime set forth in the caput excludes any other form of levy of IBS and CBS on the respective development, being subject to
  the levy of these taxes exclusively in the manner set forth in this article.

        § 2 The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the taxpayer subject to the special regime referred to in the caput is prohibited in relation to the acquisitions
  intended for the real estate development subject to the segregated estate.

         § 3 The option for the special regime set forth in the caput prevents the deduction of the adjustment reducers provided for in art. 257 and of the social reducer provided for in art. 259 in the
  disposal of real estate arising from the real estate development.


         § 4 The taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime who acquires real estate arising from a real estate development subject to the specific regime referred to
  in the caput may not appropriate IBS and CBS credits relating to the acquisition of the real property.

         § 5 In the case of acquisition by a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime, transactions taxed under the optional regime referred to in the caput
  shall constitute an adjustment reducer equivalent to what would be constituted had the real property been acquired from a non-taxpayer of the regular IBS and CBS regime, under the terms
  of item III of the caput of art. 258.

         § 6 The IBS and CBS credits arising from the indirect costs and expenses paid by the developer and appropriated to each development in the manner provided in
  § 4 of art. 4 of Federal Law No. 10,931 of 2004 must be reversed by the developer.

            § 7 In the case of the option referred to in this article, Federal Law No. 10,931 of 2004 applies insofar as it does not contradict the provisions of this article.

        § 8 The amount paid under items I and II of the caput of this article shall be distributed among the state, district and municipal shares of the IBS and the CBS in
  proportion to their respective reference rates. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                       Subsection II

                                                                                On Land Subdivision (Parcelamento do Solo)

        Art. 486. The taxpayer who disposes of real estate arising from a land subdivision, whose subdivision registration request, under the terms of
  Federal Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979, was made effective before January 1, 2029, may opt for the payment of CBS based on the gross
  revenue received.

        Art. 486. The taxpayer who disposes of real estate arising from a land subdivision, whose subdivision registration request, under the terms
  of Law No. 6,766, of December 19, 1979, was made effective before January 1, 2029, may opt for the payment of IBS and of CBS based on the gross
  revenue received. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 1 Transactions subject to the regime referred to in this article shall be subject to the payment of CBS in an amount equivalent to 3.65% of the gross revenue
  received.

         § 1 Transactions subject to the regime referred to in this article shall be subject to the payment of IBS and of CBS in an amount equivalent to 3.65% (three
  point sixty-five percent) of the gross revenue received. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 2 The option for the payment set forth in the caput excludes any other form of levy of IBS and CBS on the respective land subdivision, being
  subject to the tax levy of these taxes exclusively in the manner set forth in the caput.

            § 3 The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the taxpayer who exercises the option referred to in the caput is prohibited.

         § 4 The option for the payment set forth in the caput prevents the deduction of the adjustment reducers provided for in art. 257 and of the social reducer provided for in art. 259 in the
  disposal arising from the land subdivision.

         § 5 The taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime who acquires real estate arising from a land subdivision subject to the taxation regime referred to
  in the caput may not appropriate IBS and CBS credit relating to the acquisition of the real property.

         § 6 In the case of acquisition by a taxpayer subject to the regular IBS and CBS regime, transactions taxed under the optional regime referred to in the caput
  shall constitute an adjustment reducer equivalent to what would be constituted had the real property been acquired from a non-taxpayer of the regular IBS and CBS regime, under the terms
  of item III of the caput of art. 258.

         § 7 Gross revenue is considered to be the total revenues earned from the sale of the real estate units that make up the land subdivision, as well as the
  financial revenues and monetary variations arising from this transaction.

       § 8 The payment of CBS in the manner set forth in the caput of this article shall be considered final, giving rise, under no circumstances, to any right to restitution or to
  offset, except in the case of rescission of the transaction.

          § 8 The payment of IBS and of CBS in the manner set forth in the caput of this article shall be considered final, giving rise, under no circumstances, to any right to
  restitution or offset, except in the case of rescission of the transaction. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 9 The revenues, costs and expenses of the land subdivision subject to taxation under this article shall not be included in the calculation of the
  tax base of the CBS owed by the taxpayer as a result of its other business activities.

        § 9 The revenues, costs and expenses of the land subdivision subject to taxation under this article shall not be included in the
  calculation of the tax base of the IBS and of the CBS owed by the taxpayer as a result of its other business activities.           (Wording given by
  Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

        § 10. For purposes of the provision in § 7 of this article, the indirect costs and expenses paid by the taxpayer in the month shall be appropriated to each land subdivision,
  in the same proportion represented by the direct costs of the operations arising from the land subdivision, in relation to the taxpayer's total direct cost,
  understood as the sum of all direct costs of all activities carried out by the taxpayer.

         § 11. The IBS and CBS credits arising from the indirect costs and expenses paid by the taxpayer and appropriated to each land subdivision in the manner
  provided for in § 10 must be reversed by the taxpayer.

            § 12. The taxpayer is required to maintain segregated accounting records for each land subdivision subject to the taxation regime provided for in this
  article.

        § 13. The amount paid under § 1 of this article shall be distributed among the state, district and municipal shares of the IBS and the CBS in proportion to the
  respective reference rates. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                       Subsection III

                                                        On the Leasing, Onerous Assignment and Renting of Real Property

         Art. 487. The taxpayer who carries out the leasing, onerous assignment or renting of real property arising from contracts entered into for a fixed term may
  opt for the payment of IBS and CBS based on the gross revenue received.

            § 1 The option provided for in the caput shall apply exclusively:

            I - to contracts for non-residential purposes, for the original term of the contract, provided that it:

            a) is entered into by the date of publication of this Complementary Law, with the date evidenced by a notarized signature or by electronic signature; and

        b) is registered with the Real Estate Registry Office or with the Registry of Titles and Documents by December 31, 2025, or is made available to the RFB
  and to the IBS Management Committee, under the terms of the regulation;

        II - to contracts for residential purposes, for the original term of the contract or until December 31, 2028, whichever occurs first, provided that it was entered into by the
  date of publication of this Complementary Law, with the date evidenced by a notarized signature, by electronic signature, or by proof of payment
  of the rent by the last day of the month following the first month of the contract.

        § 2 Transactions subject to the regime referred to in this article shall be subject to the payment of IBS and CBS in an amount equivalent to 3.65% of the gross revenue
  received.

         § 2 Transactions subject to the regime referred to in this article shall be subject to the payment of IBS and of CBS in an amount equivalent to 3.65% (three
  point sixty-five percent) of the gross revenue received. (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         § 3 The option for the payment set forth in the caput excludes any other form of levy of IBS and CBS on the respective transaction, being subject to the
  levy of these taxes exclusively in the manner set forth in the caput.

        § 4 The appropriation of IBS and CBS credits by the taxpayer who exercises the option referred to in the caput is prohibited, in relation to the transactions related
  to the real property subject to the optional regime referred to in this article.

         § 5 The option for the payment set forth in the caput prevents the use of the social reducer provided for in art. 260.

       § 6 Gross revenue is considered to be the total revenues earned in the transactions referred to in the caput, as well as the financial revenues and monetary
  variations arising from this transaction.

          § 7 The payment of IBS and CBS in the manner set forth in the caput of this article shall be considered final, giving rise, under no circumstances, to any right to
  restitution or offset.

        § 8 The revenues, costs and expenses of the transactions referred to in the caput shall not be included in the calculation of the tax base of the IBS and of the CBS
  owed by the taxpayer as a result of its other business activities.

        § 9 The indirect costs and expenses paid by the taxpayer in the month shall be appropriated to each transaction, in the same proportion represented by the revenues
  of those transactions, in relation to the taxpayer's total revenue.

        § 10. The IBS and CBS credits arising from the indirect costs and expenses appropriated by the taxpayer and allocated to the transactions subject to the optional regime
  referred to in this article under § 9 must be reversed.

        § 11. The taxpayer is required to maintain segregated accounting records identifying the transactions subject to the taxation regime provided for
  in this article.

        § 12. The amount paid under § 2 of this article shall be distributed among the state, district and municipal shares of the IBS and the CBS in proportion to the
  respective reference rates. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                                                                       Section II

                                                            On Transactions Initiated from January 1, 2029

         Art. 488. Starting January 1, 2029, the taxpayer may deduct from the IBS tax base levied on the disposal of real property the amount paid on the
  acquisition of goods and services carried out between January 1, 2027 and December 31, 2032 that are used for the development, land subdivision and
  construction of the property.

         § 1 The deduction referred to in the caput corresponds to the value of the acquisitions of goods and services:

         I - subject to the levy of the tax provided for in art. 155, II, or the tax provided for in art. 156, III, both of the Federal Constitution;

         II - recorded as a direct production cost of the real property; and

         III - whose acquisition was supported by a valid tax document.

         § 2 In the disposal of real property arising from a development or land subdivision, the indirect costs and expenses paid by the taxpayer that are subject to ICMS or ISS may
  be deducted from the IBS tax base, which shall be allocated to the project in the same proportion represented by the direct costs
  of the project in relation to the taxpayer's total direct cost, understood as the sum of the direct costs of all activities carried out by the
  taxpayer.

       § 3 The amounts to be deducted correspond to the IBS and CBS tax base relating to the acquisition of the goods and services, as recorded in the
  tax document, multiplied by:

         I - 1 (one whole), in the case of goods and services acquired between January 1, 2027 and December 31, 2028;

         II - 0.9 (nine tenths), in the case of goods and services acquired in the 2029 calendar year;

         III - 0.8 (eight tenths), in the case of goods and services acquired in the 2030 calendar year;

         IV - 0.7 (seven tenths), in the case of goods and services acquired in the 2031 calendar year; and

         V - 0.6 (six tenths), in the case of goods and services acquired in the 2032 calendar year.

        § 4 The deduction referred to in the caput does not exclude the right to appropriate the IBS and CBS credits paid by the taxpayer, nor the application of the
  adjustment reducers provided for in art. 257 and of the social reducer provided for in art. 259.

         § 5 The provision in this article does not apply if the taxpayer has opted for the special regime referred to in art. 485 or exercised the option referred to in art.
  486.

       § 6 The amounts to be deducted from the tax base may be used to adjust the IBS tax base of prior periods or of
  subsequent periods relating to the same real property or to the same project, when they exceed the value of the IBS tax base of the respective period.

                                                                                       Section III

                                                                                 Final Provisions

        Art. 489. The total revenue of the IBS and of the CBS collected under art. 487 shall be distributed between the CBS and the state and municipal shares of the IBS in proportion
  to their respective reference rates at the time the taxable event occurred.

        Art. 490. The provision in § 2 of art. 6 does not apply to the Rental Housing Fund - FAR (Fundo de Arrendamento Residencial), referred to in Law No. 10,188, of February 12, 2001, which
  may retain the full amount of the IBS and CBS credits relating to the goods or services acquired by the FAR, even in the case of donation.

                                                                                      TITLE IV

                                                                                FINAL PROVISIONS



       Art. 491. In the event of a merger, extinction or incorporation of any of the ministries, secretariats and other public administration bodies referred to in this Complementary
  Law, an act of the Head of the Executive Branch of the Union shall define the body responsible for assuming the respective responsibilities provided for in this Complementary
  Law.     Taking effect

          Art. 492. For purposes of the provisions of this Complementary Law:                                Taking effect

          I - the Mercosur Common Nomenclature/Harmonized System - NCM/SH corresponds to that approved by Gecex Resolution No. 272, of November 19,
  2021;

          II - the Brazilian Nomenclature of Services - NBS corresponds to that approved by Joint Ordinance RFB/SECEX No. 2,000, of December 18, 2018.

          § 1 The codes contained in this Complementary Law are in accordance with the NCM/SH and with the NBS referred to in items I and II of the caput.

        § 2 Any future changes to the NCM/SH and NBS referred to in the caput that result in a change in the tax classification of the products mentioned in this
  Complementary Law shall not affect the provisions applied to them based on the prior classification.

        Art. 493. References made in this Complementary Law to the SELIC rate, to the DI rate, to the IPCA and to other indices or rates apply to the respective indices and
  rates that come to replace them.     Taking effect

        Art. 493-A. A special public association is instituted, composed of the Union - represented by the RFB - and by the CGIBS, headquartered and domiciled in the Federal District, with
  the objective of developing, implementing, managing and operationalizing, in a shared manner, modules, systems and components relating to the administration of the IBS and the
  CBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 1 The association referred to in the caput of this article qualifies as a public entity of a special nature and is subject to the legal regime of public
  law. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 2 The association's activity is characterized by the absence of hierarchical linkage, tutelage or subordination to any public administration
  body. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 3 The association has its own legal personality, distinct from the Union, the CGIBS, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, and is guaranteed
  administrative, patrimonial, technical and financial autonomy, within the limits established in regulation and in this article. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of
  2026)

        § 4 A joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS shall provide for the association's internal regiment, especially regarding:                                                    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

          I - the delimitation of the objectives, competences and purposes;                                      (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       II - the rules of structure, governance, management and operation, ensuring shared governance on an equal footing among the associates, as
  well as transparency, administrative efficiency and accountability in management; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          III - the internal control mechanisms and the rules on accountability to the associates; and                                             (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          IV - provisions on assets, revenues and expenses.                               (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 5 The association's governance rules, defined in a joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS, shall ensure:                                                        (Included by Complementary Law No. 227,
  of 2026)

          I - the equal participation of the associates in the deliberative bodies;                                     (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          II - the principle of shared governance, with collegiate deliberations; and                                              (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       III - observance of the principles of legality, impersonality, morality, publicity, efficiency, cost-effectiveness and transparency.                                               (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 6 Biddings and contracting carried out by the association shall be governed by the general bidding and contracting rules applicable to the direct, autarchic
  and foundational public administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 7 The association may be contracted by the associated parties, with bidding waived.                                             (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

       § 8 The association may enter into agreements, cooperation accords and other arrangements with bodies and entities of the direct and indirect Public Administration,
  as well as with international organizations, subject to legal and regulatory limits. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 9 The appropriations necessary to cover the association's expenses shall be included in the budget proposal of the Union and of the CGIBS, in the form
  established in a specific joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 10. The Union and the CGIBS are subsidiarily liable for the association's obligations.                                                 (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 11. The association is subject to accounting, operational and patrimonial oversight by the Court of Accounts competent to review the accounts of its
  legal representative. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 12. It is incumbent upon the Federal Court of Accounts (Tribunal de Contas da União) to oversee the application of resources transferred by the Union to the association.                                                 (Included by Complementary
  Law No. 227, of 2026)

          § 13. The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities may second civil servants to the association, in the form and under the conditions of each
  entity's legislation.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        § 14. The association shall be governed by this article, by the complementary rules approved in a joint act of the RFB and the CGIBS and, subsidiarily,
  insofar as not incompatible with its special nature, by Law No. 11,107, of April 6, 2005, and its regulation. (Included by Complementary Law No.
  227, of 2026)

       § 15. The provisions of this article do not preclude the execution of technical cooperation agreements between the RFB and the CGIBS for the non-onerous transfer of
  modules, systems and technological solutions developed by either party. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

          Art. 494. (VETOED).         Effects to take place

          Art. 495. (VETOED).           Effects to take place

          Art. 496. Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 - National Tax Code, shall be amended as follows:                                        Effects to take place

                       "Art. 9 .....................................................................................

                       ..........................................................................................................

                       IV - charge taxes and the contribution referred to in item V of art. 195 of the Federal Constitution on:
                     ..........................................................................................................

                     b) religious entities and temples of any faith, including their welfare and charitable organizations;

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 497. Decree-Law No. 37, of November 18, 1966, shall be amended as follows:                                         Effects to take place

                     "Art. 44.....................................................................................

                      Sole paragraph. The information provided by the taxpayer in the import declaration constitutes a confession of debt by the
               taxpayer and a suitable and sufficient instrument for demanding the value of the taxes levied on the operations recorded therein,
               with the tax credit thereby constituted." (NR)

        Art. 498. Law No. 10,931, of August 2, 2004, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 3 The land and accessions subject to the real estate development under the special taxation regime, as well as the other
               assets and rights linked to it, shall not answer for tax debts of the developer relating to the Corporate Income
               Tax - IRPJ, the Social Contribution on Net Profit - CSLL, the Contribution for the Financing of Social Security
               - COFINS, the Contribution to the Social Integration Programs and for the Formation of the Public Servant's Patrimony - PIS/PASEP, the
               Social Contribution on Goods and Services (CBS) and the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS), except for those calculated in the manner of art. 4 on
               the revenues earned within the scope of the respective development.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 499. Law No. 7,998, of January 11, 1990, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                     "Art. 11. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     V - 18% (eighteen percent) of the Social Contribution on Goods and Services - CBS; and

                     VI - other resources allocated to it." (NR)

        Art. 500. Law No. 8,019, of April 11, 1990, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                      "Art. 1 The revenue corresponding to 18% (eighteen percent) of the Social Contribution on Goods and Services - CBS and that
               arising from the contribution to the Program for the Formation of the Public Servant's Patrimony, created by Complementary Law No. 8, of
               December 3, 1970, shall be allocated, each year, to the full coverage of the needs of the Workers' Support Fund (FAT), referred to
               in art. 10 of Law No. 7,998, of January 11, 1990." (NR)

                     "Art. 2 As established in § 1 of art. 239 of the Federal Constitution, at least 28% (twenty-eight percent) of the revenue
               referred to in the preceding article shall be transferred to the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES), for application
               in economic development programs.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 501. Complementary Law No. 87, of September 13, 1996, shall be amended as follows:                                         Effects to take place

                     "Art. 31-A. In relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2029 to December 31, 2032, the rates of the tax
               shall be reduced in the following proportions of the rates provided for in the legislation of the States or the Federal District, in force on December
               31, 2028:

                     I - 10% (ten percent), in 2029;

                     II - 20% (twenty percent), in 2030;

                     III - 30% (thirty percent), in 2031; and

                     IV - 40% (forty percent), in 2032.

                     § 1 The provisions of the caput apply to all operations and provisions taxed by the tax, including:

                     I - fuels on which the levy occurs only once, referred to in Complementary Law No. 192, of March 11,
               2022;

                    II - the rates established in Resolution No. 22, of May 19, 1989, and in Resolution No. 13, of April 25, 2012, both of the
               Federal Senate.

                   § 2 During the period referred to in the caput, tax or financial benefits or incentives relating to the tax shall be reduced in the
               same proportion as the reduction of the rates provided for in the items of the caput.

                      § 3 For purposes of applying the provisions of § 2, the percentages and other parameters used to calculate the benefits or
               tax or financial incentives relating to the tax shall be reduced in the same proportion as the reduction of the rates, as a result of the
               provisions of the caput of this article.

                     § 4 The provisions of § 3 do not apply where the tax or financial benefits or incentives relating to the tax have already been
               proportionally reduced by virtue of the reduction of the rates pursuant to the terms of the caput of this article.

                      § 5 It is incumbent upon the National Council for Treasury Policy (Confaz) to establish the discipline to be observed in the case referred
               to in § 3.

                     § 6 For purposes of § 5, the deliberations shall be approved by simple majority of the votes.

                     § 7 The tax or financial benefits and incentives referred to in art. 3 of Complementary Law No. 160, of August 7, 2017,
               shall be reduced in the manner set out in this article, without application of the reduction provided for in § 2-A of art. 3 of the said Complementary Law."

        Art. 502. Law No. 9,430, of December 27, 1996, shall be amended as follows:                                         Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                      "Art. 64. Payments made by federal public administration bodies, autarchies and foundations to legal entities, for the
               supply of goods or provision of services, are subject to withholding, at source, of income tax and of the Social Contribution
               on Net Profit.


                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 503. Law No. 9,432, of January 8, 1997, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place

                     "Art. 11. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 9-A. The provisions of § 9 do not apply to the Social Contribution on Goods and Services - CBS.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 504. Law No. 9,718, of November 27, 1998, shall be amended as follows:                                       Effects to take place     Effects to take place

                      "Art. 9 Monetary variations of credit rights and of the taxpayer's obligations, as a function of the exchange rate or of
               indices or coefficients applicable by legal or contractual provision, shall be considered, for purposes of income tax and
               Social Contribution on Net Profit legislation, as revenues or financial expenses, as the case may be." (NR)

        Art. 505. Law No. 9,779, of January 19, 1999, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place       Effects to take place

                     "Art. 11. ....................................................................................

                       Sole paragraph. The provisions of the caput also apply where the raw material, intermediate product and packaging material are
               used in a product subject to the Selective Tax." (NR)

         Art. 506. Provisional Measure No. 2,158-35, of August 24, 2001, shall be amended as follows:                                             Effects to take place      Effects to take
  place

                     "Art. 30. As of January 1, 2000, monetary variations of credit rights and of the taxpayer's obligations, as a
               function of the exchange rate, shall be considered, for purposes of determining the tax base of income tax and of the CSLL, as well
               as of determining the exploration profit, when the corresponding transaction is settled.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 507. Law No. 10,637, of December 30, 2002, shall be amended as follows:                                       Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                      "Art. 35. Revenue arising from the valuation of securities, financial instruments, derivatives and items subject to
               hedge, recorded by financial institutions and other entities authorized to operate by the Central Bank of Brazil, institutions
               authorized to operate by the Superintendency of Private Insurance - Susep and companies authorized to operate in insurance or reinsurance,
               resulting from the marking to market to the extent it exceeds the yield produced up to that date, shall be included in the tax
               base of the Corporate Income Tax and of the Social Contribution on Net Profit only upon disposal
               of the respective assets.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 508. Complementary Law No. 116, of July 31, 2003, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 8-B. In relation to taxable events occurring from January 1, 2029 to December 31, 2032, the rates of the tax
               shall be reduced in the following proportions of the rates provided for in the legislation of the Municipalities or of the Federal District, in force on
               December 31, 2028:

                     I - 10% (ten percent), in 2029;

                     II - 20% (twenty percent), in 2030;

                     III - 30% (thirty percent), in 2031; and

                     IV - 40% (forty percent), in 2032.

                   § 1 During the period referred to in the caput, tax or financial benefits or incentives relating to the tax shall be reduced in the
               same proportion as the reduction of the rates provided for in the items of the caput.

                      § 2 For purposes of applying the provisions of § 1, the percentages and other parameters used to calculate the tax or financial
               benefits or incentives relating to the tax shall be reduced in the same proportion as the reduction of the rates, as a result of the
               provisions of the caput of this article.

                     § 3 The provisions of § 2 do not apply where the tax or financial benefits or incentives relating to the tax have already been
               proportionally reduced by virtue of the reduction of the rates pursuant to the terms of the caput of this article."

        Art. 509. Law No. 10,833, of December 29, 2003, shall be amended as follows:                                       Effects to take place     Effects to take place

                       "Art. 23. The levy of the CIDE, under the terms of item V of art. 3 of Law No. 10,336, of December 19, 2001, on
               liquefied petroleum gases, classified under subheading 2711.1 of the Mercosur Common Nomenclature - NCM, does not reach the products
               classified under code 2711.11.00." (NR)

                     "Art. 30. Payments made by legal entities to other legal entities under private law, for the provision of services
               of cleaning, conservation, maintenance, security, surveillance, transport of valuables and provision of labor, for the provision of services
               of credit advisory, marketing, credit management, selection and risk, management of accounts payable and receivable, as well as for the
               remuneration of professional services, are subject to withholding at source of the Social Contribution on Net Profit - CSLL.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                    "Art. 31. The amount of the CSLL referred to in art. 30 shall be determined by applying, to the amount to be paid, the percentage
               of 1% (one percent).

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 32. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     Sole paragraph. Withholding of the CSLL shall be required on payments:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 33. The Union, through the Federal Revenue Secretariat, may enter into agreements with the States, the Federal District and
               Municipalities, to establish responsibility for withholding the CSLL at source, by applying the rate provided for in art. 31, on
               payments made by bodies, autarchies and foundations of those public administrations to legal entities under private law, for the
               supply of goods or the provision of services in general." (NR)

                      "Art. 34. The following entities of the federal public administration are required to make withholdings at source of income tax and of the
               CSLL, referred to in art. 64 of Law No. 9,430, of December 27, 1996:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 67. Where it is impossible to identify the imported merchandise, due to its loss or consumption, and there is
               generic description in the available commercial and transport documents, a single rate of 70% (seventy percent) relating to the
               Import Tax and the Tax on Industrialized Products - IPI shall be applied for purposes of determining the taxes levied on the
               import.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 The rate referred to in the caput shall be distributed in the following percentages:

                     I - 35% (thirty-five percent), as the Import Tax rate; and

                     II - 35% (thirty-five percent), as the IPI rate." (NR)

        Art. 510. Law No. 10,931, of August 2, 2004, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                     "Art. 4 For each real estate development subject to the special taxation regime, the developer shall be subject to a payment
               equivalent to 1.92% (one point ninety-two percent) of the monthly revenue received, which shall correspond to the unified
               monthly payment of the following tax and contributions:

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 6 For projects of development of residential properties of social interest whose construction has begun or been contracted
               as of March 31, 2009, the percentage corresponding to the unified payment of the taxes referred to in the caput of this article shall be
               equivalent to 0.47% (forty-seven hundredths percent) of the monthly revenue received, provided that, by December 31, 2018, the
               development has been registered at the competent real estate registry or the construction contract has been signed.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 8 For projects of construction and development of residential properties of social interest, the percentage corresponding to the
               unified payment of the taxes referred to in the caput of this article shall be equivalent to 0.47% (forty-seven hundredths percent) of the
               monthly revenue received, in accordance with regulation by the Special Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of Brazil.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 8 For purposes of tax revenue sharing and of the provisions of § 2 of art. 4, the percentage of 1.92% (one point ninety-
               two percent) referred to in the caput of art. 4 shall be considered:

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      Sole paragraph. The percentage of 0.47% (forty-seven hundredths percent) referred to in § 6 of art. 4 shall be considered for
               purposes of the caput:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 511. Law No. 11,033, of December 21, 2004, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                      "Art. 14. Sales and imports of machinery, equipment, spare parts and other goods, in the domestic market, when
               acquired or imported directly by the beneficiaries of Reporto and intended for their fixed assets for exclusive use in the
               performance of services of, shall be carried out with suspension of the Tax on Industrialized Products - IPI, and, where applicable, of the Import
               Tax - II:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 512. Law No. 11,051, of December 29, 2004, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                      "Art. 32. For purposes of determining the tax base of the Corporate Income Tax and of the Social Contribution
               on Net Profit, positive or negative results incurred in transactions carried out in futures settlement markets,
               including those subject to position adjustments, shall be recognized upon settlement of the contract, assignment or closing of the
               position.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 513. Law No. 11,079, of December 30, 2004, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 6 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 6 As of January 1, 2014, for those opting under art. 75 of Law No. 12,973, of May 13, 2014, and as of January
               1, 2015, for non-opting parties, the portion excluded under § 3 must be included in the determination of net profit for
               purposes of assessing actual profit and the CSLL tax base in each assessment period during the remaining term of the contract,
               counted from the commencement of the provision of public services.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 11. Should the concession be extinguished before the contractual term is reached, the balance of the portion excluded under § 3,
               not yet added back, must be included in the determination of net profit for purposes of assessing actual profit, the
               CSLL tax base and the social security contribution referred to in item III of § 3 in the assessment period of the extinction.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 514. Law No. 11,096, of January 13, 2005, shall be amended as follows:                                    Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 8 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 1 The exemption referred to in items I and II of the caput of this article shall fall on the profit arising from the conduct of
               higher education activities, from undergraduate courses or sequential courses of specific training.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 515. Law No. 11,196, of November 21, 2005, shall be amended as follows:                                  Effects to take place   Effects to take place

                      "Art. 11. The import of new goods listed by the Executive Branch intended for the development, in the Country, of software and
               information technology services, listed in regulation by the Executive Branch, without national equivalent, carried out directly
               by the beneficiary of Repes for incorporation into its fixed assets, shall be carried out with suspension of the requirement of the Tax on
               Industrialized Products - IPI.

                     § 1 The suspension referred to in the caput converts into an exemption after the conditions referred to in art. 2 of this Law have been met,
               observing that:

                     I - the percentage of exports referred to in art. 2 of this Law shall be assessed considering the average obtained, from the calendar
               year following the beginning of use of the goods acquired within the scope of Repes, over a period of 3 (three) calendar years;
               and

                     II - the term for beginning of use referred to in item I of this article may not exceed 1 (one) year, counted from the
               date of its acquisition.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 110. For purposes of determining the tax base of the IRPJ and of the CSLL, financial institutions and other institutions
               authorized to operate by the Central Bank of Brazil must record as revenues or expenses incurred in transactions carried out in
               futures settlement markets:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 516. Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, shall be amended as follows:                                  Effects to take place

                     "Art. 1 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IV - the single national taxpayer registry referred to in item IV of § 1 of art. 146 of the Federal Constitution.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 2 .....................................................................................

                      I - Management Committee of Simples Nacional, linked to the Ministry of Finance, composed of 4 (four) representatives of the Union, 2
               (two) of the States and the Federal District, 2 (two) of the Municipalities, 1 (one) of the Brazilian Micro and Small Business Support Service
               (Sebrae) and 1 (one) of the national confederations representing the micro-enterprise and small business segment referred to
               in art. 11 of Complementary Law No. 147, of August 7, 2014, to deal with tax matters;

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      III - Committee for the Integration of Tax Administrations and Management of the National Network for the Simplification of the Registration and
               Legalization of Businesses and Enterprises - CGSIM, linked to the Ministry of Finance, composed of representatives of the Union, States,
               Municipalities and the Federal District and other support and registration bodies, in the manner defined by the Executive Branch, to deal with
               tax registration acts and the process of registration and legalization of business owners and legal entities.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4-A. The minimum quorum for holding CGSN meetings shall be 3/4 (three quarters) of the members, one of whom
               shall necessarily be the President or their substitute.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 8 Members of the CGSN and of the CGSIM shall be appointed by the Minister of State for Finance, upon nomination by the relevant
               bodies and entities.

                      § 8-A. Of the Union's members composing the CGSN, 3 (three) shall be representatives of the Special Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of
               Brazil and 1 (one) of the Ministry of Entrepreneurship, Micro-enterprise and Small Business or the body that may succeed it.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 3 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 1 Gross revenue, for purposes of the caput, is considered to be the proceeds from the sale of goods and services in transactions on
               own account, the price of services rendered, the result of transactions on behalf of third parties and the other revenues of the activity or main
               purpose of the micro-enterprises or small businesses, not including cancelled sales and unconditional discounts
               granted.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     V - whose partner or de facto or de jure owner is an administrator or equivalent of another for-profit legal entity, provided
               that the combined gross revenue exceeds the limit referred to in item II of the caput;

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     XII - that has a branch, subsidiary, agency or representation abroad.

                     ..........................................................................................................


                       § 19. For purposes of this Complementary Law, all economic activities carried out, the
               gross revenues earned and the tax debts of the entities referred to in the caput and in art. 18-A must be considered, even if under
               separate registration numbers or as an individual taxpayer, within the same calendar year." (NR)

                     "Art. 12. ....................................................................................

                     § 1 (Vetoed).

                      § 2 Simples Nacional must observe the principles of simplicity, transparency, tax justice, cooperation and
               integration of the tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities and of environmental protection.

                      § 3 The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities shall exercise tax administration of Simples Nacional in an
               integrated manner, within the terms and limits established by the Federal Constitution and by this Complementary Law." (NR)

                     "Art. 17. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     II - whose owner or partner is domiciled abroad;

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     XV - that engages in the leasing of its own real estate;

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 25-A. The data from tax documents and returns of any kind shall be shared among the tax administrations
               of the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Municipalities, in the manner established by the CGSN."

                     "Art. 25-B. The MEI, defined in art. 18-A, shall annually submit to the Special Secretariat of the Federal Revenue of Brazil
               a single, simplified statement of socioeconomic and tax information, observing the deadline and template approved by the CGSN.

                      Sole paragraph. The information in the statement referred to in the caput has a declaratory nature, constituting a confession of debt and
               a suitable and sufficient instrument for demanding taxes and contributions that have not been paid resulting from the information
               provided therein."

                     "Art. 26. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     II - keep in good order and custody the documents that supported the assessment of the taxes and contributions owed and
               compliance with the ancillary obligations referred to in arts. 25 and 25-B of this Complementary Law until the statute-of-limitations period
               has elapsed and any pertinent actions are no longer subject to limitation.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 3 The requirement of the returns referred to in arts. 25 and 25-B does not exempt from providing information relating to
               third parties.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4-A. .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     II - provision by the stipulating tax administration of a free program for use by the opting company.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 12-A. Fiscal bookkeeping, under the terms of § 4-A, exempts from the provision of the information provided for in § 12.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 38-A. ................................................................................

                      I - 2% (two percent) per calendar month or fraction thereof, from the day following the end of the period originally set for
               the filing of the return, levied on the amount of the taxes and contributions arising from the information provided in the electronic
               calculation system referred to in § 15 of art. 18, even if fully paid, in the event of failure to provide information or
               provision thereof after the deadline, capped at 20% (twenty percent), subject to § 2 of this article; and

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 1 For purposes of applying the fine provided for in item I of the caput, the day following the end of the
               period originally set for the filing of the return shall be considered the starting date and, as the ending date, the date of the actual
               filing or, in the case of non-filing, the date the infraction notice was issued.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 Subject to § 2, the fines shall be reduced:

                     I - by half, where the return is filed after the deadline but before any ex officio proceeding;

                     II - to 75% (seventy-five percent), where the return is filed within the deadline set in a notice.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 5 A return that does not meet the technical specifications established by the CGSN shall be deemed not filed.

                     § 6 In the case referred to in § 5, the taxpayer shall be notified to file a new return, within 10 (ten) days, counted
               from awareness of the notice, and shall be subject to the fine provided for in item I of the caput, subject to §§ 1 and 2." (NR)

                     "Art. 41. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................


                     § 4 The provisions of this article apply to taxes and contributions that have not been paid resulting from the information
               provided in the returns referred to in arts. 25 and 25-B." (NR)

        Art. 517. Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, shall be amended as follows:                                       Effects to take place   Effects to take place

                     "Art. 3 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 1-A. The gross revenue referred to in § 1 also comprises revenue from transactions with tangible or intangible assets,
               including rights, or with services.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 11. In the case of exceeding the limit provided for in art. 13-A, where the gross revenue earned by the company during the calendar year of
               commencement of activity exceeds 1/12 (one twelfth) of the established limit multiplied by the number of months of operation in that
               period, the company shall not be able to collect ICMS, ISS and IBS under the Simples Nacional regime, with retroactive effect to the beginning of its
               activities.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 13. The impediment referred to in § 11 shall not apply retroactively to the beginning of activities if the excess verified in relation to gross revenue
               does not exceed 20% (twenty percent) of the limit referred to in that paragraph, in which case the effects of the impediment shall occur in the
               following calendar year.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 15. In the case referred to in § 14, for purposes of determining the rate referred to in § 1 of art. 18, the tax base provided for in its
               § 3 and the application of a rate on the excess portion of gross revenue provided for in its §§ 16, 16-A, 17, 17-A, 17-B and 17-C, the
               gross revenues earned in the domestic market and those arising from exports shall be considered separately.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 13. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IX - Tax on Goods and Services - IBS;
                     X - Social Contribution on Goods and Services - CBS.

                     IX - Tax on Goods and Services (IBS);                                  (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     X - Social Contribution on Goods and Services (CBS).                                        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     § 1 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     XII-A - IBS and CBS levied on:
                     a) the import of tangible or intangible assets, including rights, or of services;

                     XII-A - IBS and CBS levied on:                           (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     a) the import of tangible or intangible assets, including rights, or of services;                                     (Wording given by Complementary Law No.
               227, of 2026)

                     b) (VETOED);

                     c) the transaction with tangible assets not covered by a tax document; and                                           (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                    XII-B - IBS levied under the terms of art. 446 of Complementary Law No. 214, of January 16, 2025;                                                (Included by
               Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     XIV-A - Selective Tax - IS on production, extraction, marketing or import of goods and services harmful to health or
               to the environment;

                     XIV-A - Selective Tax (IS) on production, extraction, marketing or import of goods and services harmful to health
               or to the environment; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 9 An entity opting for Simples Nacional may assess and collect the IBS and the CBS in accordance with the regular regime applicable to
               those taxes, in which case the portions relating to them shall not be charged under the single regime. (Included by Complementary Law
               No. 227, of 2026)

                     § 10. An entity opting for Simples Nacional may assess and collect the IBS and the CBS in accordance with the regular regime applicable to
               those taxes, in which case the portions relating to them shall not be charged under the single regime.

                     § 10. The option referred to in § 9 shall be exercised for the semesters beginning in January and July of each year, being irrevocable
               for each of those periods, and must be exercised in the months of September and March immediately preceding each semester, in the
               manner regulated by the CGSN.        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     § 11. The option referred to in § 10 shall be exercised for the semesters beginning in January and July of each year, being irrevocable
               for each of those periods, and must be exercised in the months of September and April immediately preceding each semester." (NR)

                     § 11. The option referred to in § 9 shall take effect from the date of commencement of activity referred to in § 3 of art. 16
               of this Complementary Law, provided that it is exercised under the terms, deadline and conditions to be established by an act of the CGSN.                  (Wording
               given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     "Art. 13-A. For purposes of collecting ICMS, ISS and IBS under Simples Nacional, the maximum limit referred to in item II of the
               caput of art. 3 shall be R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million, six hundred thousand reais), subject to the provisions of §§ 9 to 15 of the same article, and
               to §§ 17 to 17-C of art. 18." (NR)

                        "Art. 16. ....................................................................................

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 2 The option referred to in the caput of this article must be exercised in the month of September, by its last business day, taking effect
               from the first day of the calendar year following that of the option, except as provided in § 3 of this article.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                        "Art. 18. ....................................................................................

                     § 1 For purposes of determining the nominal rate, the taxpayer shall use the gross revenue accumulated over the twelve months
               preceding the month before the assessment period.

                        § 1-A. .....................................................................................

                        I - RBT12: gross revenue accumulated over the twelve months preceding the month before the assessment period;

                        ..........................................................................................................

                     § 1-B. ......................................................................................................................................           (Included by Complementary Law
               No. 227, of 2026)

                     I - the maximum effective percentage allocated to the ISS shall be 5% (five percent), with any difference transferred, proportionally,
               to federal taxes and to the IBS of the same gross revenue bracket; (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                        ................................................................................................................................................ ' (NR)

                        § 3 The effective rate determined under the caput and §§ 1, 1-A and 2 shall be levied on the gross revenue earned in the month.

                        § 4 ..........................................................................................

                     I - resale of merchandise and sale of merchandise manufactured by the taxpayer, which shall be taxed in accordance with Annex I
               of this Complementary Law, subject to item II;

                     II - sale of merchandise manufactured by the taxpayer subject to IPI maintained under the terms of item "a" of item III of art. 126
               of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act of the Federal Constitution of 1988, which shall be taxed in accordance with Annex II of this Complementary
               Law;

                        ..........................................................................................................

                        § 4-A. .....................................................................................

                     I - arising from transactions or provisions subject to concentrated taxation at a single stage (single-phase), as well as, in
               relation to ICMS, IBS and CBS, where the tax has already been collected by a tax substitute or through tax anticipation with
               closure of taxation;

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 5 Industrial activities shall be taxed in accordance with Annex I of this Complementary Law, except for the sale of merchandise
               manufactured by the taxpayer subject to IPI maintained under the terms of item "a" of item III of art. 126 of the Transitional Constitutional
               Provisions Act of the Federal Constitution of 1988, which shall be taxed in accordance with Annex II of this Complementary Law.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 5-K. For calculating the ratio referred to in §§ 5-J and 5-M, the amounts paid and
               earned in the twelve months preceding the month before the assessment period shall be considered, respectively, for purposes of classification
               under the Simples Nacional tax regime.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 10. In the case referred to in § 7, the specific-purpose company referred to in art. 56 of this Complementary Law or the
               export trading company may not deduct from the amount due any amount as an IPI, IBS and CBS credit, arising from
               the acquisition of the merchandise and services subject to the levy.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                     § 14. Subject to § 14-A, the reduction in the amount to be collected under Simples Nacional relating to the amounts of revenue
               arising from the export referred to in item IV of § 4-A of this article shall also correspond to the effective rates relating to ICMS and
               to ISS, assessed on the basis of Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law.

                      § 14-A. The reduction in the amount to be collected under Simples Nacional relating to the amounts of revenue arising from the export
               referred to in item IV of § 4-A of this article shall correspond to the effective rates relating to IPI, IBS and CBS, assessed on the basis of the
               Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 16. In the case referred to in § 12 of art. 3, the portion of gross revenue that exceeds the amount determined in § 10 of that
               article shall be taxed jointly with the portion that does not exceed it, in accordance with the effective rates referred to in § 1-A.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                     § 17. Subject to § 17-B, in the case referred to in § 13 of art. 3, the portion of gross revenue that exceeds the amount
               determined in § 11 of that article, in relation to the percentages applicable to ICMS and ISS, shall be taxed jointly with the portion
               that does not exceed it, in accordance with the effective rates referred to in § 1-A.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                      § 17-B. In the case referred to in § 13 of art. 3, the portion of gross revenue that exceeds the amount determined in § 11 of that article
               shall be subject, in relation to the percentages applicable to IBS, and shall be taxed jointly with the portion that does not exceed it, in accordance with
               the effective rates referred to in § 1-A.

                       § 17-C. The provisions of § 17-B also apply to the case referred to in art. 13-A, from the month in which the excess over the
               gross revenue limit occurs and until the month before the effects of the impediment.


                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 24. For purposes of applying § 5-K, payroll, including charges, is considered to be the amount paid, over the twelve months
               preceding the month before the assessment period, as remuneration to individuals arising from work, plus
               the amount actually collected as employer social security contribution and FGTS, including partner-manager withdrawals (pró-labore).

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 18-A. ................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IV - the option for classification as an Individual Micro-Entrepreneur implies the option for collection of:

                      a) the contribution referred to in item X of § 1 of art. 13 of this Complementary Law, in the manner provided for in § 2 of art. 21 of Law No.
               8,212, of July 24, 1991;

                     b) ICMS, ISS, IBS and CBS at the fixed amounts provided for in item V of this paragraph;

                     V - the MEI, with annual gross revenue equal to or less than R$ 81,000.00 (eighty-one thousand reais), shall collect, in the manner regulated by
               the Management Committee, a monthly amount corresponding to the sum of the following installments:

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     d) IBS and CBS at the amounts listed in Annex VII of this Complementary Law;

                     e) ICMS and ISS at the amounts listed in Annex VII of this Complementary Law;

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 21. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3-A. IBS and CBS debts may be extinguished through collection:

                     I - at the financial settlement of the transaction (split payment), subject to arts. 31 to 35 of the law instituting the IBS and the CBS;

                     II - made by the acquirer, under the terms of art. 36 of the law instituting the IBS and the CBS.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 14-A. In the event of an undue payment, the refund of the IBS and the CBS shall only be due to the taxpayer where:

                     I - the transaction did not generate credit for the acquirer of the goods or services; and

                     II - the provisions of art. 166 of Law No. 5,172, of October 25, 1966 (National Tax Code), have been observed.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 23. ....................................................................................

                      § 1 Legal entities and those treated as such under tax legislation that do not opt for Simples Nacional shall be entitled to
               credit corresponding to the ICMS, the IBS and the CBS levied on their acquisitions of tangible or intangible assets, including rights, and
               of services from a micro-enterprise or small business opting for Simples Nacional, in an amount equivalent to that charged under
               that single regime.
                      § 2 The rate applicable to calculating the credit referred to in § 1 must be stated in the tax document and shall correspond to the
               percentages of ICMS, IBS and CBS provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law for the gross revenue bracket to which the micro-enterprise
               or small business is subject in the month of the transaction.
                      § 3 Where the transaction occurs in the month of commencement of activities of the micro-enterprise or small business opting for
               Simples Nacional, the rate applicable to calculating the credit referred to in § 1 shall correspond to the percentages of ICMS, IBS and CBS
               referring to the lowest rate provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law.

                      § 1 Legal entities and those treated as such under tax legislation that do not opt for Simples Nacional shall be
               entitled to credit corresponding to the ICMS levied on their acquisitions of merchandise from a micro-enterprise or
               small business opting for Simples Nacional, provided it is intended for resale or industrialization and subject to, as a limit, the
               ICMS actually owed by the entities opting for Simples Nacional in relation to those acquisitions.              (Wording given by
               Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                      § 1-A. Legal entities and those treated as such under tax legislation that do not opt for Simples Nacional shall be
               entitled to credit for the IBS and the CBS levied on their acquisitions of tangible or intangible assets, including rights, and of services
               from a micro-enterprise or small business opting for Simples Nacional, in an amount equivalent to that charged under
               that single regime. (Included by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                     § 2 The rate applicable to calculating the credit referred to in § 1 must be stated in the tax document and shall correspond to the
               percentages of ICMS, IBS and CBS provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law for the gross revenue bracket to which the
               micro-enterprise or small business is subject in the month of the transaction.            (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227,
               of 2026)

                     § 3 Where the transaction occurs in the month of commencement of activities of the micro-enterprise or small business opting
               for Simples Nacional, the rate applicable to calculating the credit referred to in § 1 shall correspond to the percentages of ICMS, IBS and
               CBS referring to the lowest rate provided for in Annexes I to V of this Complementary Law.           (Wording given by Complementary Law No.
               227, of 2026)

                     § 4 ..........................................................................................

                    I - the micro-enterprise or small business is subject to ICMS taxation under Simples Nacional at fixed monthly
               amounts, in relation to the acquirer's right to credit for that tax;

                    I - the micro-enterprise or small business is subject to ICMS taxation under Simples Nacional at fixed monthly
               amounts, in relation to the acquirer's right to credit for that tax; (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)
                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 25. Information relating to the taxable events of Simples Nacional must be provided by the micro-enterprise or small
               business opting for the regime in the month following its occurrence, within the period established for payment of the respective taxes,
               in the electronic calculation system referred to in § 15 of art. 18, by means of a simplified return transmitted to the Special Secretariat of the
               Federal Revenue of Brazil, subject to, in relation to the information, the template approved by the CGSN.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 2 The return referred to in the caput shall contain the socioeconomic and tax information of the opting entity, in accordance with the form and deadlines defined
               by the CGSN.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 6 The Federal Revenue Secretariat of Brazil may present to the opting entity an assisted return in the electronic system referred to
               in the caput, in the manner and within the deadline provided for by the CGSN.

                      § 7 The assisted return made under § 6 of this article, if the taxpayer confirms it or makes adjustments to it, constitutes
               a confession of debt in relation to the transactions occurring in the period.

                     § 8 In the absence of any statement by the taxpayer on the assisted return within the period referred to in the caput, the balance assessed shall be
               presumed correct and the tax credit shall be deemed constituted.

                      § 9 The provisions of §§ 6 to 8 do not preclude the prerogative of ex officio assessment of a tax credit relating to differences
               subsequently verified by the tax administration." (NR)

                     "Art. 26. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 1 The MEI shall prove gross revenue by presenting the sales record or the record of services rendered in the
               manner established by the CGSN.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 6 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     II - the issuance of a tax document shall be mandatory for sales and provision of services carried out by the MEI.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 10. The act of issuing or receiving a tax document by electronic means established by the tax administrations, in
               any modality, whether inbound, outbound or of provision, in the manner established by the CGSN, constitutes its own fiscal
               bookkeeping and a sufficient element for the grounding and constitution of the tax credit, having a declaratory nature and constituting a confession
               of the amount of taxes owed.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 31. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 The CGSN shall regulate the procedures relating to the impediment to collecting ICMS, ISS and IBS under Simples
               Nacional, on account of exceeding the limit established in the manner of art. 13-A.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 32. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 The provisions of the caput and of § 1 apply, in relation to ICMS, ISS and IBS, to a company impeded from collecting those taxes
               under Simples Nacional, on account of exceeding the limit referred to in art. 13-A." (NR)

                     "Art. 38. An Individual Micro-Entrepreneur that fails to file the Simplified Declaration referred to in art. 25-B of this Complementary
               Law, within the set deadline, or that files it with inaccuracies or omissions, shall be notified to file the original return, in the
               case of non-filing, or to provide clarifications, in other cases, in the manner and within the deadlines defined by the Management Committee, and shall be
               subject to the following fines:

                     I - 2% (two percent) per calendar month or fraction thereof, levied on the amount of the taxes and contributions reported in
               the Simplified Declaration, even if fully paid, in the case of failure to file the return or filing after the deadline, capped at
               20% (twenty percent), subject to § 3 of this article;

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 The minimum fine to be applied shall be R$ 50.00 (fifty reais).

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 38-A. A taxpayer that fails to provide the information provided for in art. 25, within the period referred to in its caput, or that
               provides it with inaccuracies or omissions, shall be notified to do so, in the case of non-filing, or to provide clarifications, in other
               cases, within the period set by the tax authority, in the manner defined by the CGSN, and shall be subject to the following fines, for each month
               of reference:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 41. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 5 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................
                     VI - the tax credit relating to the IBS." (NR)

                     "Art. 65. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4 ..........................................................................................

                     I - the Union, in relation to the IPI;

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 87-B. For purposes of the option referred to in § 2 of art. 16, for the 2027 calendar year, the option referred to in the caput of
               art. 16 shall be exercised in the month of September 2026." (NR) (See Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

        Art. 518. Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, shall be amended as follows:                                         Effects to take place

                     "Art. 3 .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 11. In the case of exceeding the limit provided for in art. 13-A, where the gross revenue earned by the company during the calendar year of
               commencement of activity exceeds 1/12 (one twelfth) of the established limit multiplied by the number of months of operation in that
               period, the company shall not be able to collect the IBS under Simples Nacional, with retroactive effect to the beginning of its activities.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 13-A. For purposes of collecting the IBS under Simples Nacional, the maximum limit referred to in item II of the caput of art. 3 shall be
               R$ 3,600,000.00 (three million, six hundred thousand reais), subject to the provisions of §§ 9 to 15 of the same article, and to §§ 17 and 17-A to 17-C
               of art. 18." (NR)

                     "Art. 18-A. ................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IV - ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     b) the IBS and the CBS at the fixed amounts provided for in item V of this paragraph;

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 4-B. The CGSN shall determine the activities authorized to opt for the collection system referred to in this article, so as
               to avoid the weakening of labor relations.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 31. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 3 The CGSN shall regulate the procedures relating to the impediment to collecting the IBS under Simples Nacional, on account
               of exceeding the limit established in the manner of art. 13-A.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 32. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3 The provisions of the caput and of § 1 apply, in relation to the IBS, to a company impeded from collecting that tax under
               Simples Nacional, on account of exceeding the limit referred to in art. 13-A." (NR)

                     "Art. 35. The rules relating to interest and default and ex officio fines provided for income tax apply to the taxes and
               contributions owed by the micro-enterprise and by the small business, enrolled in Simples Nacional." (NR)

       Art. 519. Annexes I to V of Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, shall be amended to read as Annexes XVIII to XXII of this Complementary
  Law. Effects to take place     Effects to take place

       Art. 520. Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006, shall be amended to include Annex VII as set out in Annex XXIII of this Complementary
  Law.   Effects to take place Effects to take place

        Art. 521. Law No. 11,488, of June 15, 2007, shall be amended as follows:                                      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 38. An exemption from the Import Tax, from the Tax on Industrialized Products and from the CIDE-Fuels is granted, under the
               terms, limits and conditions established in regulation, levied on the import of:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 522. Law No. 11,508, of July 20, 2007, shall be amended as follows:                                     Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                     "Art. 6-A. .................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4 ..........................................................................................

                     I - taxpayer, in import transactions, in relation to the IPI and to the Import Tax;


                        II - responsible party, in domestic market acquisitions, in relation to the IPI.

                        ..........................................................................................................

                        § 7 ..........................................................................................

                        I - a 0% (zero percent) rate, after a period of 2 (two) years has elapsed, counted from the date of occurrence of the taxable event, in the case of the
               IPI; and

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                        "Art. 6-B. .................................................................................

                        ..........................................................................................................

                        § 2 ..........................................................................................

                        I - a 0% (zero percent) rate, in the case of the IPI; and

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 523. Law No. 11,898, of January 8, 2009, shall be amended as follows:                                       Effects to take place     Effects to take place

                     "Art. 10. Federal taxes and contributions owed by an entity opting for the Regime referred to in art. 1 of this Law shall be calculated
               by applying a single rate of 33% (thirty-three percent) on the acquisition price of the imported merchandise, as shown in the
               commercial invoice or equivalent document, subject to the minimum reference values established by the Federal Revenue Secretariat
               of Brazil, without prejudice to § 3 of art. 9 of this Law.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 524. Law No. 11,945, of June 4, 2009, shall be amended as follows:                                         Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                     "Art. 12. The domestic market acquisition or the import, combined or not, of merchandise for use or consumption
               in the industrialization of a product to be exported may be carried out with suspension of the Import Tax and of the Tax on
               Industrialized Products - IPI.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 525. Law No. 12,249, of June 11, 2010, shall be amended as follows:                                        Effects to take place     Effects to take place

                        "Art. 30. ....................................................................................

                        ..........................................................................................................

                     § 7 The provisions of item "b" of item I of § 1 of art. 29 of Law No. 10,637, of December 30, 2002, do not apply to
               the legal entity benefiting from Retaero.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                        "Art. 31. ....................................................................................

                        ..........................................................................................................

                        § 3 ..........................................................................................

                        I - as taxpayer, in relation to the IPI levied on customs clearance of imports;

                        II - as responsible party, in relation to the IPI.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)
        Art. 526. Lei nº 12.350, of December 20, 2010, is amended to read as follows:                                          Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                      "Art. 30. The government subsidies referred to in art. 19 of Lei nº 10.973, of December 2, 2004, and art. 21 of Lei nº
               11.196, of November 21, 2005, shall not be computed for purposes of determining the tax base of the Corporate Income Tax -
               IRPJ and the Social Contribution on Net Profit - CSLL, provided that the requirements established
               in specific legislation have been met and the counterparts undertaken by the beneficiary company have been fulfilled.

                      § 1º The use of resources arising from the government subsidies referred to in the caput shall not constitute expenses or costs
               for purposes of determining the tax base of the IRPJ and the CSLL.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                       "Art. 31. The acquisition on the domestic market or the importation, in a combined manner or not, of merchandise equivalent to that employed or
               consumed in the industrialization of an exported product may be carried out with exemption from the Import Tax and with a reduction to zero
               of the IPI.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 527. Lei nº 12.431, of June 24, 2011, is amended to read as follows:                                         Effects to take place    Effects to take place

                        "Art. 16-E. ................................................................................

                        I - as taxpayer, in relation to the IPI linked to importation and to the Import Tax;

                        II - as person responsible, in relation to the IPI.

                        ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 528. Lei nº 12.598, of March 21, 2012, is amended to read as follows:                                         Effects to take place   Effects to take place

                        "Art. 9º .....................................................................................

                        ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3º ..........................................................................................

                     I - as taxpayer, in relation to the IPI levied upon customs clearance of importation; and

                     II - as person responsible, in relation to the IPI.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 529. Lei nº 12.599, of March 23, 2012, is amended to read as follows:                                      Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 14. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4º ..........................................................................................

                     I - as taxpayer, in relation to the IPI levied upon customs clearance and to the Import Tax; or

                     II - as person responsible, in relation to the IPI referred to in item III of the caput.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 530. Lei nº 12.715, of September 17, 2012, is amended to read as follows:                                      Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 18. ....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     III - of the IPI, the Import Tax and the Contribution of Intervention in the Economic Domain intended to finance the Program for
               Stimulating University-Business Interaction for the Support of Innovation levied on:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                     "Art. 20. ....................................................................................

                     Sole paragraph. .......................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     II - contain the expression "Sale made with suspension of the IPI requirement", specifying the corresponding legal
               provision and the number of the certificate issued by the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation." (NR)

                     "Art. 23. ....................................................................................

                     Sole paragraph. .......................................................................

                     I - as taxpayer, in relation to the IPI linked to importation; or

                     II - as person responsible, in relation to the IPI and to the Contribution of Intervention in the Economic Domain intended to finance the Program for
               Stimulating University-Business Interaction for the Support of Innovation." (NR)

        Art. 531. Lei nº 13.097, of January 19, 2015, is amended to read as follows:                                     Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                      "Art. 14. Subject to the provisions of this Law, the Tax on Industrialized Products - IPI owed by importers and by legal entities that carry out
               industrialization and commercialization of products classified under the following codes of the Table of Incidence of the Tax on Industrialized Products -
               Tipi, approved by Decreto nº 7.660, of December 23, 2011, shall be required in the manner of the legislation applicable to legal entities in general:

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

                      "Art. 33. Minimum values of the IPI are hereby established according to the tax classification under the Tipi, the type of product and the capacity
               of the container, as set out in Annex I of this Law.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 532. Lei nº 13.586, of December 28, 2017, is amended to read as follows:                                       Effects to take place      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 6º .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 2º ..........................................................................................

                     I - of the federal taxes levied on importation referred to in items I and II of § 1º of this article; or

                     II - of the federal tax referred to in item II of § 1º of this article.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 8º The acquisition of the final product referred to in this article shall be carried out with suspension of payment of the Tax on
               Industrialized Products.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 533. Lei nº 14.148, of May 3, 2021, is amended to read as follows:                                       Effects to take place     Effects to take place

                     "Art. 4º .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 3º Withholding of the IRPJ and the CSLL is hereby waived when the payment or credit relates to revenues exempted in the manner
               of this article.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 534. Lei nº 14.789, of December 29, 2023, is amended to read as follows:                                      Effects to take place   Effects to take place

                     "Art. 11. The amount of the tax credit shall not be computed in the tax base of the IRPJ and the CSLL." (NR)

                     "Art. 17. The provisions of this Law shall not preclude the enjoyment of federal tax incentives relating to the IRPJ and the CSLL granted by specific
               law, including the benefits granted to the Manaus Free Trade Zone and to the areas of operation of the Superintendência do Desenvolvimento
               do Nordeste (Sudene) and the Superintendência do Desenvolvimento da Amazônia (Sudam)." (NR)

        Art. 535. Lei Complementar nº 101, of May 4, 2000, is amended to read as follows:                                      Effects to take place

                     "Art. 2º .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IV - ..........................................................................................

                     a) in the case of the Federal Government (União), the amounts transferred to the States, the Federal District and Municipalities by constitutional or legal
               determination, including the amounts delivered to the States and the Federal District through the Fund established by art. 159-A of the
               Constitution, and the contributions mentioned in item "a" of item I and in item II of art. 195, and in art. 239 of the Constitution;

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 536. (VETOED).         Effects to take place

        Art. 537. Lei nº 9.718, of November 27, 1998, is amended to read as follows:                                      Effects to take place

                      "Art. 5º The Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins levied on gross revenue earned by the producer or importer in
               transactions with ethanol, including for fuel purposes, shall be calculated based on the rates, respectively, of 5.25% (five
               and twenty-five hundredths percent) and 24.15% (twenty-four and fifteen hundredths percent).

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 1º ..........................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     IV - by the distributor, in the case of sale of fuel ethanol.

                     § 4º The producer and the importer referred to in the caput of this article may opt for a special regime for assessment and payment of the
               Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins, with a single levy, under which the specific rates of the contributions are fixed,
               respectively, at R$ 34.33 (thirty-four reais and thirty-three centavos) and R$ 157.87 (one hundred and fifty-seven reais and eighty-seven
               centavos) per cubic meter of fuel ethanol.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4º-C. In the case of sale of gasoline by the distributor, with respect to the percentage of anhydrous alcohol added thereto, the
               rates of the Contribution to PIS/Pasep and Cofins are hereby reduced to zero.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                     § 4º-D. .....................................................................................

                     I - in the case of a cooperative not opting for the special regime referred to in § 4º of this article, the amounts of the Contribution to
               PIS/Pasep and Cofins owed shall be obtained by applying the rate set forth in the caput of art. 5º.

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 10. The application of the coefficients referred to in § 8º of this article may not result in rates of the Contribution to
               PIS/Pasep and Cofins higher than, respectively, 1.65% (one and sixty-five hundredths percent) and 7.6% (seven and
               six tenths percent) of the average retail sale price.

                      § 11. The average price referred to in § 10 of this article shall be determined from data collected by suitable institutions, weighted
               based on the volumes of ethanol traded in the States and the Federal District in the 12 (twelve) months preceding
               the setting of the coefficients referred to in § 8º of this article.

                     § 12. In the calendar year in which the legal entity begins alcohol production or import activities, the option for the special
               regime may be exercised on any date, taking effect from the first day of the month in which it is exercised.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 538. Lei nº 10.637, of December 30, 2002, is amended to read as follows:                                       Effects to take place

                     "Art. 2º .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 1º-A. Excepted from the provisions of the caput of this article is the gross revenue earned from the sale of ethanol, including for fuel purposes,
               to which the rates provided for, as applicable, in art. 5º of Lei nº 9.718, of November 27, 1998, apply.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 539. Lei nº 10.833, of December 29, 2003, is amended to read as follows:                                       Effects to take place

                     "Art. 2º .....................................................................................

                     ..........................................................................................................

                      § 1º-A. Excepted from the provisions of the caput of this article is the gross revenue earned from the sale of ethanol, including for fuel purposes,
               to which the rates provided for, as applicable, in art. 5º of Lei nº 9.718, of November 27, 1998, apply.

                     ................................................................................................. " (NR)

        Art. 540. The following provisions of art. 5º of Lei nº 9.718, of December 27, 1998, are hereby revoked:                                    Effects to take place


        I - items I and II of the caput;

        II - items I and II of § 4º;

        III - items I and II of § 4º-A;

        IV - items I and II of § 4º-C;

        V - item II of § 4º-D;

        VI - §§ 9º, 13-A and 14-A; and

        VII - §§ 21 and 22.

        Art. 541. Item VII of § 1º of art. 13 of Lei Complementar nº 123, of 2006, is hereby revoked, as of January 1, 2025.   Effects to take place

        Art. 542. The following are hereby revoked as of January 1, 2027:       Effects to take place   Effects to take place

        I - item "b" of the caput of art. 3º of Lei Complementar nº 7, of September 7, 1970;

        II - art. 1º of Lei Complementar nº 17, of December 12, 1973;

        III - the following provisions of Lei Complementar nº 70, of December 30, 1991:

        a) arts. 1º to 6º; and

        b) arts. 9º and 10;

        IV - Lei nº 9.363, of December 13, 1996;

        V - the following provisions of Lei nº 9.430, of December 27, 1996:

        a) §§ 7 and 8º of art. 64; and

        b) art. 66;

        VI - arts. 53 and 54 of Lei nº 9.532, of December 10, 1997;

        VII - arts. 11-A to 11-C of Lei nº 9.440, of March 14, 1997;

        VIII - arts. 1º to 4º of Lei nº 9.701, of November 17, 1998;

        IX - the following provisions of Lei nº 9.715, of November 25, 1998:

        a) of art. 2º:

        1. item I of the caput; and

        2. §§ 1º and 2º;

        b) art. 3º;

        c) arts. 5º and 6º;

        d) items I and II of the caput of art. 8º; and

        e) arts. 12 and 13;

        X - arts. 2º to 8º-B of Lei nº 9.718, of November 27, 1998;

        XI - Lei nº 10.147, of December 21, 2000;

        XII - the following provisions of Medida Provisória nº 2.158-35, of August 24, 2001:

        a) art. 1º;

        b) arts. 4º and 5º;

        c) arts. 12 to 18;

        d) art. 20;

        e) item I of art. 23;

        f) arts. 42 and 43; and

        g) art. 81;

        XIII - Lei nº 10.276, of September 10, 2001;

        XIV - Lei nº 10.312, of November 27, 2001;

        XV - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.336, of December 19, 2001:

        a) art. 8º; and

        b) art. 14;

        XVI - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.485, of July 3, 2002:

        a) arts. 1º to 3º; and

        b) arts. 5º and 6º;

        XVII - arts. 2º and 3º of Lei nº 10.560, of November 13, 2002;
        XVIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.637, of December 30, 2002:

        a) arts. 1º to 5º-A;

        b) arts. 7º and 8º;

        c) arts. 10 to 12;

        d) art. 32; and

        e) art. 47;

        XIX - Lei nº 10.676, of May 22, 2003;

        XX - arts. 17 and 18 of Lei nº 10.684, of May 30, 2003;

        XXI - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.833, of December 29, 2003:

        a) arts. 1º to 16;

        b) art. 25;

        c) § 1º of art. 31;

        d) arts. 49 and 50;

        e) art. 52;

        f) art. 55;

        g) arts. 57 and 58; and

        h) art. 91;

        XXII - § 4º of art. 5º of Lei nº 10.848, of March 15, 2004;

        XXIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.865, of April 30, 2004:

        a) arts. 1º to 20;

        b) arts. 22 and 23;

        c) arts. 27 to 31;

        d) art. 34;

        e) arts. 36 to 38;

        f) art. 40 and 40-A; and

        g) art. 42;

        XXIV - art. 4º of Lei nº 10.892, of July 13, 2004;

        XXV - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.925, of July 23, 2004:

        a) art. 1º;

        b) arts. 7º to 9º-A; and

        c) arts. 13 to 15;

        XXVI - the following provisions of Lei nº 10.931, of August 2, 2004:

        a) items II and IV of the caput of art. 4º; and

        b) of art. 8º:

        1. items I and II of the caput; and

        2. items I and II of the sole paragraph;

        XXVII - arts. 2º to 5º of Lei nº 10.996, of December 15, 2004:

        XXVIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.033, of December 21, 2004:

        a) § 2º of art. 14; and

        b) art. 17;

        XXIX - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.051, of December 29, 2004:

        a) art. 2º;

        b) arts. 7º to 10; and

        c) arts. 30 and 30-A;

        XXX - item II of § 3º and § 12 of art. 6º of Lei nº 11.079, of December 30, 2004;

        XXXI - item I of art. 50-A of Lei nº 11.101, of February 9, 2005;

        XXXII - items III and IV of the caput of art. 8º of Lei nº 11.096, of January 13, 2005;

        XXXIII - of Lei nº 11.116, of May 18, 2005:
        a) arts. 3º to 9º; and

        b) art. 16;

        XXXIV - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.196, of November 21, 2005:

        a) arts. 4º to 6º;

        b) §§ 1º, 3º and 5º of art. 8º;

        c) art. 9º;

        d) arts. 12 to 16;

        e) arts. 28 to 30;

        f) of art. 31:

        1. item II of the caput; and

        2. § 7º;

        g) arts. 41 to 51;

        h) arts. 55 to 59;

        i) arts. 62 to 65;

        j) art. 109; and

        k) § 4º of art. 110;

        XXXV - art. 10 of Lei nº 11.371, of November 28, 2006;

        XXXVI - the following provisions of Lei Complementar nº 123, of December 14, 2006:

        a) items IV and V of art. 13;

        b) the sole paragraph of art. 22;

        c) item IV of § 4º of art. 23;

        d) items "b" and "c" of item V of § 3º of art. 18-A; and

        e) arts. 19 and 20;

        f) § 15-A of art. 18;

        g) §§ 3º to 5º of art. 25;

        h) of art. 38:

        1. item II of the caput; and

        2. § 6º;

        i) items I and II of § 4º of art. 41.    (Revoked by Lei Complementar nº 227, of 2026)

        XXXVII - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.484, of May 31, 2007:

        a) items I and II of the caput of art. 3º;

        b) Section II to Section V of Chapter II;

        c) item I of § 2º of art. 4º-B; and

        d) art. 21;

        XXXVIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.488, of June 15, 2007:

        a) items I and II of the caput of art. 3º; and

        b) items I and II of the caput of art. 4º;

        c) art. 6º;

        XXXIX - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.508, of July 20, 2007:

        a) items III to VI of the caput of art. 6º-A;

        b) items III to VI of the caput of art. 6º-B;

        c) art. 6º-D; and

        d) item II of art. 6º-H;

        XL - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.727, of June 23, 2008:

        a) arts. 5º to 7º;

        b) arts. 9 to 12;

        c) arts. 14 to 16;

        d) arts. 24 and 25; and
        e) art. 33;

        XLI - arts. 1º and 2º of Lei nº 11.774, of September 17, 2008;

        XLII - Lei nº 11.828, of November 20, 2008;

        XLIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.898, of January 8, 2009:

        a) items III and IV of the caput of art. 9º; and

        b) items III and IV of § 1º of art. 10;

        XLIV - the following provisions of Lei nº 11.945, of June 4, 2009:

        a) § 2º of art. 1º;

        b) art. 5º;

        c) item II of § 1º of art. 12;

        d) art. 12-A; and

        e) art. 22;

        XLV - art. 4º of Lei nº 12.024, of August 27, 2009;

        XLVI - arts. 32 to 37 of Lei nº 12.058, of October 13, 2009;

        XLVII - art. 4º of Lei nº 12.096, of November 24, 2009;

        XLVIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.249, of June 11, 2010:

        a) arts. 1º to 14;

        b) § 8º of art. 30;

        c) of art. 31:

        1. items I and II of the caput; and

        2. item I of § 1º; and

        d) art. 32;

        XLIX - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.350, of December 20, 2010:

        a) arts. 1º to 29;

        b) item II of § 2º of art. 30;

        c) § 2º of art. 31; and

        d) arts. 54 to 57;

        L - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.431, of June 24, 2011:

        a) arts. 16-A to 16-C; and

        b) art. 51;

        LI - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.546, of December 14, 2011:

        a) arts. 1º to 3º; and

        b) arts. 47-A and 47-B;

        LII - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.598, of March 21, 2012:

        a) of art. 9º:

        1. items I and II of the caput; and

        2. item I of § 1º;

        b) art. 9º-A; and

        c) art. 10;

        LIII - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.599, of March 23, 2012:

        a) arts. 5º to 7º-A; and

        b) of art. 14:

        1. items I and II of the caput; and

        2. § 1º;

        LIV - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.715, of September 17, 2012:

        a) item II of the caput of art. 18;

        b) arts. 24 to 33;

        c) item I of § 7º of art. 41; and
        d) art. 76;

        LV - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.794, of April 2, 2013:

        a) arts. 5º to 11; and

        b) arts. 14 to 17;

        LVI - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.839, of July 9, 2013:

        a) art. 2º; and

        b) art. 8º;

        LVII - arts. 1º to 3º of Lei nº 12.859, of September 10, 2013;

        LVIII - Lei nº 12.860, of September 11, 2013;

        LIX - arts. 29 to 32 of Lei nº 12.865, of October 9, 2013;

        LX - the following provisions of Lei nº 12.973, of May 13, 2014:

        a) arts. 56 and 57; and

        b) § 2º of art. 69;

        LXI - the following provisions of Lei nº 13.043, of November 13, 2014:

        a) Section VI of Chapter I;

        b) Section XVI of Chapter I; and

        c) the sole paragraph of art. 97;

        LXII - the following provisions of Lei nº 13.097, of January 19, 2015:

        a) arts. 24 to 32;

        b) art. 34;

        c) art. 36;

        d) art. 147; and

        e) art. 153;

        LXIII - art. 8º of Lei nº 13.169, of October 6, 2015;

        LXIV - the following provisions of Lei nº 13.586, of December 28, 2017:

        a) of art. 5º:

        1. items III and IV of § 1º; and

        2. § 5º; and

        b) of art. 6º:

        1. items III to VI of § 1º;

        2. item I of § 3º; and

        3. item I of § 9º;

        LXV - item II of § 12 of art. 11 of Lei nº 13.988, of April 14, 2020;

        LXVI - items I and II of the caput of art. 4º of Lei nº 14.148, of May 3, 2021;

        LXVII - arts. 31 and 32 of Lei nº 14.193, of August 6, 2021;

        LXVIII - items III and IV of art. 13 of Lei nº 14.301, of January 7, 2022;

        LXIX - art. 4º of Lei nº 14.374, of June 21, 2022;

        LXX - arts. 9º to 9º-B of Lei Complementar nº 192, of March 11, 2022; and

        LXXI - arts. 2º to 5º of Lei nº 14.592, of May 30, 2023.

        Art. 543. The following are hereby revoked as of January 1, 2033:       Effects to take place

        I - Decreto-lei nº 406, of December 31, 1968;

        II - the following provisions of Lei Complementar nº 24, of January 7, 1975:

        a) arts. 1º to 12; and

        b) arts. 14 and 15;

        III - Lei Complementar nº 87, of September 13, 1996;

        IV - Lei Complementar nº 116, of July 31, 2003;

        V - the following provisions of Lei Complementar nº 123, of 2006:

        a) of art. 13:
         1. items VII and VIII of the caput;

         2. items XIII and XIV of § 1º; and

         3. item II of § 6º;

         b) of art. 18:

         1. § 5º-E;

         2. §§ 14, 17, 17-A, 22-A and 23;

         c) item "e" of item V of § 3º of art. 18-A;

         d) §§ 4º and § 4-A of art. 21;

         e) art. 21-B;

         f) items I and II of the caput of art. 22;

         g) § 5º of art. 23;

         h) §§ 12 to 14 of art. 26;

         i) item V of § 5º of art. 41;

         j) item II of § 4º of art. 65;

         VI - Lei Complementar nº 160, of August 7, 2017; and

         VII - Lei Complementar nº 192, of March 11, 2022.

         Art. 544. This Complementary Law enters into force on the date of its publication, producing effects:         Production of effects

         I - as of the first day of the fourth month following its publication, in relation to arts. 537 to 540;

         II - as of January 1, 2025, in relation to arts. 35, 58, caput, 60, § 3, 62, 266, 317, 403, 480 to 484, 516 and 541;

         III - as of January 1, 2027, in relation to arts. 450, except §§ 1 and 5, 461, 467, 499, 500, 502, 504 to 507, 509 to 515, 517, 519 to 534 and 542;

        III - as of January 1, 2027, in relation to arts. 168 to 171, 309 to 315, 444, 450, except §§ 1 and 5, 461, 462, 467, 499, 500, 502, 504 to 507,
  509 to 515, 517, 519 to 534 and 542;        (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

         IV - as of January 1, 2029, in relation to arts. 446, 447, 449, 450, §§ 1 and 5, 464, 465 and 474;

         V - as of January 1, 2033, in relation to arts. 518 and 543; and

         VI - as of January 1, 2026, in relation to the other provisions.

         Brasília, January 16, 2025; 204th year of Independence and 137th year of the Republic.

  LUIZ INÁCIO LULA DA SILVA
  Luiz Paulo Teixeira Ferreira
  Fernando Haddad
  Márcio Luiz França Gomes
  Esther Dweck
  Geraldo José Rodrigues Alckmin Filho
  Maria Osmarina Marina da Silva Vaz de Lima
  Silvio Serafim Costa Filho
  Nísia Verônica Trindade Lima

  This text does not replace the one published in the DOU of 1.16.2025 - Extra Edition and republished in the DOU of 1.23.2025

                                                                                    ANNEX I

                    PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION SUBJECT TO REDUCTION TO ZERO OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES

                                            (EXCLUDING VEGETABLE PRODUCTS, FRUITS AND EGGS, LISTED IN ANNEX XV)


       ITEM                                                                     PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
   1             Rice of subheadings 1006.20 and 1006.30 and of code 1006.40.00 of the NCM/SH
                 Milk, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation relative to direct consumption by the population, classified in codes 0401.10.10,
   2
                 0401.10.90, 0401.20.10, 0401.20.90, 0401.40.10 and 0401.50.10 of the NCM/SH
                 Powdered milk, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation, classified in codes 0402.10.10, 0402.10.90, 0402.21.10, 0402.21.20,
   3
                 0402.29.10 and 0402.29.20 of the NCM/SH
                 Infant formulas, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation, classified in codes 1901.10.10, 1901.10.90 and 2106.90.90 of the
   4
                 NCM/SH
   5             Butter of code 0405.10.00 of the NCM/SH
   6             Margarine of code 1517.10.00 of the NCM/SH
   7             Beans of codes 0713.33.19, 0713.33.29, 0713.33.99 and 0713.35.90 of the NCM/SH
   8             Coffee of heading 09.01 and of subheading 2101.1, both of the NCM/SH
   9             Babassu oil of code 1513.21.20 of the NCM/SH, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation relative to consumption as food
   10            Cassava flour classified in code 1106.20.00 of the NCM/SH and tapioca and its substitutes of code 1903.00.00 of the NCM/SH
   11            Flour, groats and meal, of corn, of codes 1102.20.00 and 1103.13.00 of the NCM
   12            Corn kernels classified in code 1104.19.00 and code 1104.23.00 of the NCM/SH
   13            Wheat flour of code 1101.00.10 of the NCM/SH

   14           Sugar classified in codes 1701.14.00 and 1701.99.00 of the NCM/SH
   15           Pasta of subheading 1902.1 of the NCM/SH
                Bread commonly called "pão francês" (French-style bread roll), of cylindrical and elongated shape, with soft cream-white crumb and
                golden, crispy crust, made from a mix or pre-mix of wheat flour, biological yeast, water, salt, sugar, food additives and flour
   16
                fortification products, in conformity with the legislation in force, classified in code 1905.90.90 of the NCM/SH, and the pre-mix or dough
                for the preparation of the bread commonly called "pão francês," of codes 1901.20.10 and 1901.20.90 of the NCM/SH
   17           Oat grains of codes 1104.12.00 and 1104.22.00 of the NCM/SH
   18           Oat flour classified in code 1102.90.00 of the NCM/SH
                Beef, pork, sheep, goat and poultry meats and products of animal origin (except foie gras) of the following codes, subheadings and
                headings of the NCM/SH: a) 02.01, 02.02, 0206.10.00, 0206.2 and 0210.20.00; b) 02.03, 0206.30.00, 0206.4, 0209.10 and 0210.1; c) 02.04
   19
                and 0210.99.20, goat meat classified in code 0210.99.90 and edible offal of sheep and goats classified in codes 0206.80.00 and
                0206.90.00; d) 02.07, 0209.90.00 and 0210.99.1, except the products of codes 0207.43.00 and 0207.53.00
                Fish and fish meats (except salmonids, tuna, cod, haddock, saithe and roe and other by-products) of the following codes, subheadings
                and headings of the NCM/SH: a) 03.02; except the products of subheadings and codes 0302.1, 0302.3, 0302.51.00, 0302.52.00,
   20           0302.53.00 and 0302.9 of the NCM/SH; b) 03.03; except the products of subheadings and codes 0303.1, 0303.4, 0303.63.00, 0303.64.00,
                0303.65.00 and 0303.9 of the NCM/SH; c) 03.04; except the salmonids, tuna, cod, haddock and saithe classified in subheadings 0304.4,
                0304.5, 0304.7, 0304.8 and 0304.9 of the NCM/SH
                Mozzarella-type, minas, prato, coalho, ricotta, requeijão, provolone, parmesan, fresh unripened and "queijo do reino" cheeses
   21
                classified in codes 0406.10.10, 0406.10.90, 0406.20.00, 0406.90.10, 0406.90.20 and 0406.90.30 of the NCM/SH
                Salt, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation relative to iodine content within the limits proper for human
   22
                consumption, classified in codes 2501.00.20 and 2501.00.90 of the NCM/SH
   23           Yerba mate of heading 09.03 of the NCM/SH
   24           Low-protein flour for people with aminoacidopathies, acidemias and urea cycle disorders of NCM 1901.90.90
   25           Low-protein pasta for people with aminoacidopathies, acidemias and urea cycle disorders of NCM 1902.19.00
   26           Dietary therapeutic formulas for inborn errors of metabolism of NCM 2106.9090

                                                                                 ANNEX II

                   EDUCATION SERVICES SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


        ITEM                                                    SERVICE DESCRIPTION                                                                  NBS
   1                 Early Childhood Education, including day care and preschool                                                       1.2201.1
   2                 Elementary Education                                                                                               1.2201.20.00
   3                 High School Education                                                                                              1.2201.30.00
   4                 Technical High School Education                                                                                    1.2202.00.00
                     Education for young people and adults who did not have access to or continuity of studies in
   5                                                                                                                                    1.2203
                     elementary and high school education at the proper age
                     Higher Education, comprising undergraduate, graduate, extension courses and programs and
   6                                                                                                                                    1.2204
                     sequential courses
   7                 Teaching of visuomotor and tactile-writing linguistic systems                                                      1.2205.13.00
   8                 Teaching of native languages of indigenous peoples                                                                          1.2205.13.00
                     Special education for people with disabilities, pervasive developmental disorders and high
   9                 abilities or giftedness, whether isolated or combined with any of the stages of education addressed
                     in this Annex

                                                                                ANNEX III

                     HEALTH SERVICES SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


         ITEM                                                  SERVICE DESCRIPTION                                                                NBS
   1                    Surgical services                                                                                       1.2301.11.00
   2                    Gynecological and obstetric services                                                                    1.2301.12.00
   3                    Psychiatric services                                                                                    1.2301.13.00
   4                    Services provided in Intensive Care Units                                                               1.2301.14.00
   5                    Emergency care services                                                                                 1.2301.15.00
   6                    Hospital services not classified in previous subheadings                                                1.2301.19.00
   7                    General medical clinic services                                                                         1.2301.21.00
   8                    Specialized medical services                                                                            1.2301.22.00
   9                    Dental services                                                                                         1.2301.23.00
   10                   Nursing services                                                                                        1.2301.91.00
   11                   Physiotherapy services                                                                                  1.2301.92.00
   12                   Laboratory services                                                                                     1.2301.93.00
   13                   Diagnostic imaging services                                                                             1.2301.94.00
   14                   Human biological material bank services                                                                 1.2301.95.00
   15                   Ambulance services                                                                                      1.2301.96.00
   16                   Childbirth and postpartum care services                                                                 1.2301.97.00
   17                   Psychology services                                                                                     1.2301.98.00
   18                   Sanitary surveillance services                                                                          1.2301.99.00



   19                  Epidemiology services                                                                                    1.2301.99.00
   20                  Vaccination services                                                                                     1.2301.99.00
   21                  Speech therapy services                                                                                  1.2301.99.00
   22                  Nutrition services                                                                                       1.2301.99.00
   23                  Optometry services                                                                                       1.2301.99.00
   24                  Surgical instrumentation services                                                                        1.2301.99.00
   25                  Biomedicine services                                                                                     1.2301.99.00
   26                  Pharmaceutical services                                                                                  1.2301.99.00
   27                  Services of care and assistance for the elderly and people with disabilities in shelter units            1.2302
                       In-home support services for adults, the elderly, children, adolescents, and people with
   28                                                                                                                            1.2301.99.00
                       mental disorders and disabilities
   29                  Sterilization services                                                                                   1.2301.99.0
   30                  Funeral, cremation and embalming services                                                                1.2603.00.00

                                                                               ANNEX IV

                    MEDICAL DEVICES SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


        ITEM                                                         DESCRIPTION                                                                      NCM/SH
   1                 Drainage bag                                                                                               3926.90.30
   2                 Drainage system with intermediate assembly for continuous measurement of diuresis                          9018.90.99
   3                 X-ray plates and films, sensitized on one side                                                             3701.10.10
   4                 Bone reconstitution cements                                                                                3006.40.20
   5                 Bone graft substitutes                                                                                     3004.90.99
   6                 Collector for external drainage unit                                                                       3926.90.40
   7                 Complete connector with cap                                                                                3917.40
   8                 Y-connector                                                                                                3917.40
   9                 Exchange sets and polyelectrolytic concentrates for dialysis                                               3004.90.99
   10                Autotransfusion set                                                                                        9018.90.10
   11                Low-profile hydrocephalus set                                                                              9021.90.19
                                                                                                                                 9021.90.19
   12                Standard hydrocephalus set
                                                                                                                                 9021.90.80
   13                Permanent endocardial electrode                                                                            9021.90.91
   14                Permanent epicardial electrode                                                                             9021.90.91
   15                Temporary endocardial pacemaker electrode                                                                  9021.90.91
   16                Temporary epicardial pacemaker electrode                                                                   9021.90.91
   17                Tendon spacer                                                                                              9021.90.19
   18                Special X-ray films sensitized on both sides                                                               3702.10.20
   19                Special X-ray films sensitized on one side                                                                 3702.10.10
   20                Arterial and venous line filter                                                                            8421.29.90
   21                Arterial and venous blood filter for recirculation                                                         8421.29.90
   22                Cardioplegia filter                                                                                        8421.29.90
                     Sterile catgut, similar sterile materials for surgical sutures (including sterile absorbable
                     threads for surgery or dentistry) and sterile adhesives for organic tissues, used in surgery to
   23                close wounds; sterile laminaria; sterile absorbable hemostatics for surgery or dentistry;                  3006.10
                     sterile anti-adhesion barriers for surgery or dentistry, absorbable or not
   24                Hemoconcentrator for extracorporeal circulation                                                            9018.90.40
   25                Capillary hemodialyzer                                                                                     8421.29.11
   26                Dual-chamber cardiac pacemaker                                                                             9021.50.00
   27                Multiprogrammable cardiac pacemaker with telemetry                                                         9021.50.00
   28                Other X-ray plates and films                                                                               3701.10.29
   29                Bubble oxygenator with tubes for extracorporeal circulation                                                9018.90.99
   30                Membrane oxygenator with tubes for extracorporeal circulation                                              9018.90.99
   31                Cardiotomy reservoir                                                                                       9018.90.99
   32                Cardioplegia reservoir with tube, without filter                                                           9018.90.99
   33                Artificial kidneys                                                                                         9018.90.40
   34                Lumboperitoneal shunt                                                                                      9021.90.19
   35                Temporary skin substitute (biological/synthetic) (per cm2)                                                 3005.90.90
   36                Inorganic mesh                                                                                             3006.10.90
                                                                                                                                 9021.90.19
   37                Hydrocephalus valve
                                                                                                                                 9021.90.89
   38                Valve for ascites treatment                                                                                9021.90.19

   39               Iridium-192 source                                                                                         2844.43.90
   40               Vascular stent                                                                                             9021.90.12
   41               Reprocessor of filters used in hemodialysis                                                                8479.89.99
                                                                                                                                9021.29.00
                    Osseointegrable implants, in the form of screws, and their manufactured components, such as
   42               protective caps, mounts, assemblies, abutments (healing, connector, transfer or temporary),                9021.10.10
                    cylinders, their accessories, intended to support, hold, couple or fix dental prostheses
                                                                                                                                9021.10.20
   43               Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator                                                                     9021.90.11
   44               Embolization coil                                                                                          9021.90.12
   45               Anti-Rh immunoglobulin                                                                                     3002.12.21
   46               Other serum immunoglobulins                                                                                3002.12.22
   47               Factor VIII concentrate                                                                                    3002.12.23

                    Other blood fractions, except those prepared as medicines, serum immunoglobulins, Factor VIII              3002.12.21
   48
                    concentrate and serum albumin in gel form for preparation of diagnostic reagents                           3002.12.29
                    Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on any support and prepared diagnostic or laboratory reagents,
   49               even on a support, even presented in the form of kits, except those of heading 30.06; certified            3822.1
                    reference materials
   50               Diagnostic reagents designed to be administered to the patient, based on somatoliberin                     3006.30.21
   51               Products for dental filling, except cements                                                                3006.40.12
                    Gel preparations, designed for use in human or veterinary medicine as a lubricant for certain
   52               body parts in surgical interventions or medical examinations or as a bonding agent between the             3006.70.00
                    body and medical instruments
   53               Bags for use in colostomy, ileostomy and urostomy                                                          3006.91.10
   54               Identifiable equipment for ostomy, except bags for use in colostomy, ileostomy and urostomy                3006.91.90
   55               Bags for use in medicine (hemodialysis and similar uses)                                                   3926.90.30
   56               Articles exclusively for clinical analysis laboratories                                                    3926.90.40
                    Plastic accessories of the type used in hemodialysis blood lines, such as: obturators, including
   57                                                                                                                          3926.90.50
                    adjustable ones (clamps), clips and similar items
   58               Surgical gloves and procedure gloves                                                                       4015.1
   59               Syringes, even with needles                                                                                9018.31
   60               Tubular metal needles and suture needles                                                                   9018.32
   61               Needles, except metal ones and suture needles                                                              9018.39.10
   62               Probes, catheters and cannulas, individually or as a set                                                   9018.39.2
   63               Lancets for vaccination and cauteries                                                                      9018.39.30
   64               Instruments similar to syringes, needles, catheters and cannulas                                          9018.39.9
   65               Dental burs                                                                                               9018.49.1
   66               Files                                                                                                     9018.49.20
   67               Clamps and clips, their applicators and extractors                                                        9018.90.95

                    Other instruments and apparatus for medicine, surgery and dentistry, excluding syringes and               9018.39.99
   68
                    needles, of headings 9018.31 and 9018.32                                                                  9018.90.99
   69               Operating and examination tables, hospital and clinical-use beds                                          9402.90
   70               Laser photocoagulator                                                                                     9018.20.10
   71               Electric scalpel                                                                                          9018.90.21
   72               Anesthesia apparatus with multiparameter monitor                                                          9018.90.99
   73               Autoclave                                                                                                 8419.81.10
   74               Retinograph                                                                                               9018.50.90
   75               Culture media                                                                                             3821.00.00
   76               Thermocyclers used in diagnostics and scientific research                                                 8419.89.99
   77               Parts and components of thermocyclers                                                                     8419.90.40
   78               Laboratory pipettors for diagnostics and scientific research                                              8479.89.12
   79               Liquid-phase chromatograph                                                                                9027.20.12
   80               Automated DNA sequencers using capillary electrophoresis                                                  9027.20.21
   81               Electrophoresis apparatus for diagnostics and scientific research                                         9027.20.29
   82               Spectrophotometry analyzers for diagnostics and scientific research                                       9027.30
   83               Photometry analyzers for diagnostics and scientific research                                              9027.50.20
   84               Flow cytometer                                                                                            9027.50.50
   85               Optical radiation analyzers for diagnostics and scientific research                                       9027.50.90
   86               Other analyzers for diagnostics and scientific research                                                   9027.89.99
   87               Mass spectrometer                                                                                         9027.81.00
   88               Other analyzers for diagnostics                                                                           9027.89.99
   89               Microtome                                                                                                 9027.90.10
   90               Parts and components of laboratory analyzer equipment                                                     9027.90.9


   91               Condom                                                                                                       4014.10.00
   92               Intrauterine device (IUD)                                                                                    9018.90.99
   93               Substance for preservation of organs and tissues                                                             3824.99.89
   94               Puncture introducer for endocardial electrode implantation                                                   9021.90.91
   95               Tubular polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) graft (per cm2)                                                       9021.90.99
   96               Inorganic tubular arterial and venous graft                                                                  9021.90.99
   97               Cranial button                                                                                               9021.90.99
   98               Metal guide for introduction of dual-lumen catheter                                                          9018.39.29
   99               Dilator for dual-lumen catheter implantation                                                                 9018.39.29
   100              Exchange guide for angioplasty                                                                               9018.39.29
   101              Introducer for catheter with and without valve                                                               9018.39.29
                                                                                                                                  9018.39.99
   102              Cannula kit
                                                                                                                                  9018.39.91
   103              Suction drain                                                                                                9018.39.29
   104              Mediastinal drainage system                                                                                  9018.39.29
   105              Disposable intra-aortic balloon assembly                                                                     9018.90.99

                                                                                ANNEX V

       ACCESSIBILITY DEVICES SUITABLE FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE
                                                        IBS AND CBS RATES


          ITEM                                                     DESCRIPTION                                                                   NCM/SH
                    SPECIAL ACCESSORIES AND ADAPTATIONS TO BE INSTALLED IN MOTOR VEHICLES BELONGING TO OR
   1
                    INTENDED FOR PEOPLE WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES
   1.1              Manual clutch control, its parts and accessories                                                            8708.99.10
   1.2              Manual brake control, its parts and accessories                                                             8708.99.10
   1.3              Manual accelerator control, its parts and accessories                                                       8708.99.10
   1.4              Accelerator pedal inversion, its parts and accessories                                                      8708.99.10
   1.5              Pedal extensions, their parts and accessories                                                               8708.99.10
   1.6              Handgrip, its parts and accessories                                                                         8708.29.99
   1.7              Steering wheel servo actuators, their parts and accessories                                                 8708.99.10
   1.8              Relocation of dashboard controls, their parts and accessories                                              8708.29.99
   1.9              Rotating platform for rotational movement of the vehicle seat, its parts and accessories                    8708.29.99
                    Electric track for moving the front seat to another part of the vehicle interior, its parts
   1.10                                                                                                                         8708.29.99
                    and accessories
   1.11             Wheelchair lift platform, manual, electro-hydraulic or electromechanical                                    8428.90.90
   1.12             Wheelchair ramp, its parts and accessories                                                                  8708.29.99
   1.13             Winch for transporting wheelchairs                                                                          8425.31.10
   2                PRODUCTS FOR USE BY PEOPLE WITH VISUAL DISABILITIES
   2.1              One-piece, folding or telescopic cane, with nylon tip                                                       6602.00.00
                                                                                                                                  9102.11.10
   2.2              Braille watch, with voice synthesizer and enlarged display                                                  9102.11.90
                                                                                                                                  9102.91.00
   2.3              Digital thermometer with voice system                                                                       9025.19.90

                    Digital calculator with voice system, with verbalization of minute and hour settings, both in                8470.10.00
   2.4
                    clock mode and alarm mode, and voice announcement of calculation digits and results                         8470.29.00
   2.5              Electronic organizer with Braille keyboard, with or without voice synthesizer                               8543.70.99
   2.6              Slate for Braille writing                                                                                   9017.20.00
                    Braille display and Braille keyboard for use with microcomputers, with interactive system for
   2.7                                                                                                                          8471.60.90
                    inputting and reading data by means of Braille character tables
                    Typewriter for Braille writing, manual or electric, with common typing keyboard or in
   2.8                                                                                                                          8472.90.99
                    Braille formation
                    Printer of Braille characters for use with microcomputers, with single-sheet feed or
   2.9                                                                                                                          8443.32.22
                    both-side-of-sheet system, with or without voice command system or acoustic system
                    Synthesizer equipment for voice reproduction of signals generated by microcomputers, allowing
   2.10             the reading of file data, for internal or external use, with SSIL protocol standard for interface           8471.80.00
                    with screen-reader software
   3                PRODUCTS FOR USE BY PEOPLE WITH HEARING DISABILITIES
                    Telephone apparatus with alphanumeric keyboard and lighted display, with or without built-in
   3.1                                                                                                                          8517.1
                    printer, that allows converting signals transmitted by telephone system into characters and symbols
                                                                                                                                  9103.10.00
   3.2              Vibrating and/or light alarm clock
                                                                                                                                  9105.11.00
   3.3              Eye-movement-controlled mouse-type data input units for people with disabilities                            8471.60.53


                                                                                ANNEX VI

  COMPOSITIONS FOR ENTERAL OR PARENTERAL NUTRITION AND SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS AND NUTRITIONAL FORMULAS FOR PEOPLE WITH
         INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


        ITEM                                                          DESCRIPTION                                                                NCM/SH
   1                Dextroalphatocopherol acetate                                                                                   2936.28.12
   2                Lysine acetate                                                                                                  2922.41.90
   3                Potassium acetate                                                                                               2915.29.90
   4                Sodium acetate                                                                                                  2915.29.10
   5                Zinc acetate                                                                                                    2915.29.90
   6                Acetyltyrosine                                                                                                  2922.50.39
   7                Acetic acid                                                                                                     2915.21.00
   8                Ascorbic acid                                                                                                   2936.27.10
   9                Aspartic acid                                                                                                   2922.49.90
   10               Citric acid                                                                                                     2918.14.00
   11               Folic acid                                                                                                      2936.29.11
   12               Glutamic acid                                                                                                   2922.42.10
   13               Malic acid                                                                                                      2918.19.90
   14               Selenious acid                                                                                                  2811.19.90
   15               Water for injection                                                                                             2002.10.00
   16               Alanylglutamine                                                                                                 2922.49.90
   17               Alanine                                                                                                         2922.49.90
   18               Human albumin                                                                                                   3002.12.36
   19               Arginine                                                                                                        2925.29.19
   20               Asparagine                                                                                                      2922.49.90
   21               Sodium bicarbonate                                                                                              2836.30.00
   22               Biotin                                                                                                          2936.29.31
   23               Cyanocobalamin                                                                                                  2936.26.10
   24               Cystine                                                                                                         2930.90.39
   25               Chromic chloride                                                                                                2827.39.93
                                                                                                                                     2827.20.10
   26               Calcium chloride
                                                                                                                                     2827.20.90
                                                                                                                                     2827.31.10
   27               Magnesium chloride
                                                                                                                                     2827.31.90
   28               Manganese chloride                                                                                             2827.39.95
                                                                                                                                     3104.20.10
   29               Potassium chloride
                                                                                                                                     3104.20.90
   30               Sodium chloride                                                                                                 2501.00.90
   31               Zinc chloride                                                                                                   2827.39.98
   32               Pyridoxine hydrochloride                                                                                        2936.25.20
   33               Thiamine hydrochloride                                                                                          2936.22.10
   34               Cocarboxylase                                                                                                   2936.22.90
   35               Cholecalciferol                                                                                                 2936.29.21
   36               Ergocalciferol                                                                                                  2936.29.29
   37               Phenylalanine                                                                                                   2922.49.90
   38               Phytomenadione                                                                                                  2936.29.40
   39               Formula for phenylalanine-free diet                                                                             2106.90.90
   40               Formula for methionine-free diet                                                                                2106.90.90
   41               Formula for lysine-free and low-tryptophan diet                                                                 2106.90.90
   42               Formula for leucine-, isoleucine- or valine-free diet                                                           2106.90.90
   43               Formula for phenylalanine- and methionine-free diet                                                             2106.90.90
   44               Formula for non-essential-amino-acid-free diet                                                                  2106.90.90
   45               Formula for methionine-, threonine-, valine-free and isoleucine-restricted diet                                 2106.90.90
   46               Formula for ketogenic diet, in a ratio of 4 g of fat for each 1 g of carbohydrates and proteins                 2106.90.90
   47               Hyperlipidic formula, for supplementation of medium-chain triglycerides or triheptanoin                        2202.99.00
   48               Liquid preparation, of four parts glycerol trioleate of acid to one part glycerol trierucate                    2202.99.00
   49               Dibasic potassium phosphate                                                                                     2835.24.00
   50               Monobasic potassium phosphate                                                                                   2835.24.00
   51               Monobasic sodium phosphate                                                                                      2835.22.00
   52               Thiamine phosphate                                                                                              2936.22.90


   53               Riboflavin sodium phosphate                                                                                   2936.23.20
   54               Fructose                                                                                                      1702.50.00
   55               Sodium glycerophosphate                                                                                       2919.90.90
   56               Glycine                                                                                                       2922.49.10
   57               Calcium gluconate                                                                                             2918.16.10
   58               Glucose                                                                                                       1702.30.11
   59               Histidine                                                                                                     2933.29.92
   60               Icodextrin                                                                                                    3505.10.00
   61               Potassium iodide                                                                                              2827.60.12
   62               Isoleucine                                                                                                    2922.49.90
   63               Egg lecithin                                                                                                  2923.20.00
   64               Leucine                                                                                                       2922.49.90
   65               Levovaline                                                                                                    2922.49.90
   66               Lysine                                                                                                        2922.41.10
                                                                                                                                    2930.40.10
   67               Methionine
                                                                                                                                    2930.40.90
   68               Nicotinamide                                                                                                  2936.29.52
   69               Retinol palmitate                                                                                             2936.21.13
   70               Proline                                                                                                       2922.49.90
   71               Riboflavin                                                                                                    2936.23.10
   72               Sodium selenite                                                                                               2842.90.00
   73               Serine                                                                                                        2922.50.99
   74               Sorbitol                                                                                                      2905.44.00
   75               Magnesium sulfate                                                                                             2833.21.00
   76               Zinc sulfate                                                                                                  2833.29.70
   77               Taurine                                                                                                       2922.49.90
   78               Tyrosine                                                                                                      2922.50.39
   79               Tocopherol                                                                                                    2936.28.11
   80               Threonine                                                                                                     2922.50.99
                                                                                                                                    1513.19.00
   81               Medium-chain triglycerides
                                                                                                                                    1513.29.11

                                                                            ANNEX VII

        FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


         ITEM                                                             PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
                  Crustaceans (except lobsters and crawfish/spiny lobsters) and mollusks of the following codes and subheadings of the NCM/SH: a) 0306.1
   1              and 0306.3, except the products of subheading 0306.11 and codes 0306.15.00, 0306.31.00, 0306.34.00, 0306.39.10; and b) 0307.31.00,
                  0307.32.00, 0307.42.00, 0307.43, 0307.51.00, 0307.52.00, 0307.91.00 and 0307.92.00
                  Fermented milk, dairy drinks and compounds, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation, classified in codes
   2
                  0403.20.00, 0403.90.00 and 2202.99.00 of the NCM/SH
   3              Natural honey of code 0409.00.00 of the NCM/SH
   4              Flour of headings 1101.00, 11.02, 11.05, 11.06 and 12.08 of the NCM/SH; excluding the products listed in Annex I
   5              Groats and meal of cereals of codes 1103.11.00 and 1103.19.00 of the NCM/SH; excluding the products listed in Annex I
   6              Cereal grains of subheadings 1104.1 and 1104.2 of the NCM/SH; excluding the products listed in Annex I
   7              Corn starch of code 1108.12.00 of the NCM/SH
                  Soybean, corn and canola oils and other vegetable oils, in conformity with the requirements of the specific legislation relative to
   8
                  consumption as food, classified in subheading 1507.90 and in headings 15.08, 15.11, 15.12, 15.13, 15.14 and 15.15 of the NCM/SH
   9              Pasta of codes 1902.20.00 and 1902.30.00 of the NCM/SH
                  Natural juices of fruit or vegetable products without added sugar or other sweeteners and without preservatives classified in heading
   10
                  20.09 of the NCM/SH
                  Pulps of fruits or vegetable products without added sugar or other sweeteners and without preservatives classified in heading 20.08
   11
                  of the NCM/SH
   12             Sliced (sandwich) bread of code 1905.90.10 of the NCM/SH
   13             Tomato extract classified in code 2002.90.00 of the NCM/SH
                  Fruits, vegetable products and other vegetable products, without added sugar or other sweeteners, classified in chapters 7 and 8
   14             of the NCM/SH, excluding non-regional hard-shell fruits and the products listed in Annexes I and XV, and excepting headings 07.11,
                  08.12 and 0814.00.00
                  Cereals of chapter 10 and oilseeds and oleaginous fruits classified in chapter 12, both of the NCM/SH, excluding the products listed
   15
                  in Annex I
                  Vegetable products, even mixed together, only pre-cooked or cooked in water or steam, without added salt or any other products
   16
                  and substances, classified in headings 20.04 and 20.05 and in code 2002.10.00 of the NCM/SH
                  Regional hard-shell fruit, peanuts and other seeds, even mixed together, only roasted or cooked, without added salt or any other
   17
                  products and substances, classified in subheading 2008.1 of the NCM/SH

                                                                               ANNEX VIII

    PERSONAL HYGIENE AND CLEANING PRODUCTS MAJORITARILY CONSUMED BY LOW-INCOME FAMILIES SUBJECT TO A 60%
                                         (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


       ITEM                                                                   PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
   1              Toilet soaps classified in code 3401.11.90 of the NCM/SH
   2              Toothpaste of code 3306.10.00 of the NCM/SH
   3              Toothbrushes of code 9603.21.00 of the NCM/SH
   4              Toilet paper of code 4818.10.00 of the NCM/SH
   5              Bleach classified in code 3808.94.19 of the NCM/SH
   6              Bar soaps classified in code 3401.19.00 of the NCM/SH
   7              Diapers and similar hygiene articles, of any material, classified in code 9619.00.00 of the NCM/SH

                                                                                ANNEX IX

    AGRICULTURAL, LIVESTOCK AND AQUACULTURE INPUTS SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND
                                                                                  CBS RATES

         ITEM                                                        DESCRIPTION                                                               NBS / NCM/SH
   1                  Biofertilizers, in conformity with the definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation             3101.00.00
                                                                                                                                     Chapter 31
                                                                                                                                     3824.99.77
   2                  Fertilizers, in conformity with the definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation
                                                                                                                                     3824.99.79
                                                                                                                                     3824.99.89
                      Soil correctives (including conditioners), remineralizers and substrates for plants; in
   3                                                                                                                                 Chapter 25
                      conformity with the definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation
                      Inoculants, culture media and other microorganisms for agricultural use; in conformity with the
   4                                                                                                                                 3002.49 3002.90.00 3821.00.00
                      definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation
                                                                                                                                     38.24
                      Biostimulants and bioinputs for phytosanitary control, in conformity with the definitions and other           3807.00.00
   5
                      requirements of the specific legislation                                                                      12.11
                                                                                                                                     38.08
                      Insecticides, fungicides, formicides, herbicides, parasiticides, germicides, acaricides, nematicides,
                      rodenticides, defoliants, desiccants, adhesive spreading agents, growth stimulators and inhibitors            38.08
   6                  (regulators); all intended directly for agricultural and livestock use or intended directly for
                      the manufacture of agricultural pesticides; in conformity with the definitions and other requirements         3824.99.89
                      of the specific legislation
                                                                                                                                     05.06
                                                                                                                                     1201.10.00
                                                                                                                                     1213.00.00
                                                                                                                                     1301.90.90
                                                                                                                                     1302.19.9
                                                                                                                                     1401.90.00
                                                                                                                                     1404.90.90
                                                                                                                                     2102.20.00
                                                                                                                                     23.02
                      Limestone, ground coconut husk, peat; cakes, bagasse and other food-industry vegetable
                                                                                                                                     23.03
                      residues and waste; barks, sawdust and other wood residues and waste; residues of the
                                                                                                                                     2304.00
                      cellulose industry (dregs and grits), bones, carnauba wax residue, ashes, organic agro-industrial
                                                                                                                                     2305.00.00
                      residues, DL-methionine and its analogues, vermiculite and expanded clays, straw and husks of
                                                                                                                                     23.06
                      vegetable products, coconut fiber and other vegetable fibers, potassium or magnesium silicates,
                                                                                                                                     2308.00.00
                      natural resins and oleoresins, vegetable juices and extracts, amino acids and dead microorganisms,
   7                                                                                                                                 2703.00.00
                      essential oils, clays and earths, charcoal and mechanical wood pulps; all intended directly
                                                                                                                                     2839.90.10
                      for the manufacture of biofertilizers, fertilizers, soil correctives (including conditioners),
                                                                                                                                     2839.90.50
                      remineralizers, substrates for plants, biostimulants or biopesticides for phytosanitary control, or
                                                                                                                                     2922.4
                      used directly as biofertilizers, fertilizers, soil correctives (including conditioners), remineralizers,
                                                                                                                                     2930.40
                      substrates for plants, biostimulants or biopesticides for phytosanitary control; in conformity with
                                                                                                                                     33.01
                      the definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation
                                                                                                                                     3802.90.40
                                                                                                                                     3804.00
                                                                                                                                     3824.99.71
                                                                                                                                     4401.39.00
                                                                                                                                     4401.4
                                                                                                                                     4402.90.00
                                                                                                                                     4701.00.00
                                                                                                                                     5305.00.90
                                                                                                                                     6806.20.00




                                                                                                                                       2503.00.10
                                                                                                                                       2503.00.90
                                                                                                                                       2510.10.10
                                                                                                                                       2510.10.90
                                                                                                                                       2510.20.10
                                                                                                                                       2510.20.90
                                                                                                                                       2802.00.00
                                                                                                                                       2806.10.20
                      Nitric acid, sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid, natural calcium phosphates, sulfur, hydrochloric acid,
                                                                                                                                       2807.00.10
   8                  phosphorous acid, acetic acid, sodium hydroxide and disodium carbonate; all intended directly for
                                                                                                                                       2808.00.10
                      the manufacture of fertilizers
                                                                                                                                       2809.20.11
                                                                                                                                       2809.20.19
                                                                                                                                       2811.19.20
                                                                                                                                       2815.11.00
                                                                                                                                       2815.12.00
                                                                                                                                       2836.20.10
                                                                                                                                       2836.20.90
                                                                                                                                       2915.21.00
   9                  Enzymes prepared for the decomposition of animal and vegetable organic matter                                   3507.90.4
                      Genetic seed, basic seed, native in-natura seed, first-generation certified seed (C1), second-generation
                      certified seed (C2), first-generation uncertified seed (S1), second-generation uncertified seed
   10                                                                                                                                  Chapters 7, 10 and 12
                      (S2), and seeds of local, traditional or landrace cultivars; in conformity with the definitions and
                      other requirements of the specific legislation
                      Plant seedlings and other plant and fungus propagative materials, including plants and fungi                    06.01
   11                 native to forest species; in conformity with the definitions and other requirements of the specific
                      legislation                                                                                                     06.02

                                                                                                                                       3002.12
                                                                                                                                       3002.15
   12                 Vaccines, serums and medicines, for veterinary use, except for domestic animals                                 3002.42
                                                                                                                                       3002.90.00
                                                                                                                                       30.04
   13                 One-day-old poultry, except ornamental birds                                                                    0105.1
                                                                                                                                       0511.10.00
   14                 Embryos and semen, frozen or chilled
                                                                                                                                       0511.9
                                                                                                                                       01.02
                      Purebred breeding stock, including matrices of purebred animals of origin with genealogical
   15                                                                                                                                  01.03
                      registration; in conformity with the definitions and other requirements of the specific legislation
                                                                                                                                       01.04
   16                 Fertilized eggs                                                                                                 0407.1
   17                 Tadpoles and fingerlings                                                                                        0106.90.00
                      Animal feed, concentrates, supplements, additives, premix or nucleus, except for domestic
   18                                                                                                                                  2309.90
                      animals
                      Seeds and cereals, even crushed, in crushed grains or otherwise worked; all intended directly
   19                 for the manufacture of animal feed or directly for animal feeding, except for domestic                          Chapters 10, 11 and 12
                      animals
                                                                                                                                       23.01
                                                                                                                                       23.02
                      Bran and cakes from vegetable products and other food-industry residues and waste; all                          23.03
   20                 intended directly for the manufacture of animal feed or directly for animal feeding, except for                 2304.00
                      domestic animals                                                                                                2305.00.00
                                                                                                                                       23.06
                                                                                                                                       2308.00.00
                                                                                                                                       02.10
                      Garlic powder, mineralized salt, fish meal, oyster meal, meat meal, bone meal, feather meal,                    03.09
                      blood meal and viscera meal, calcitic limestone, animal fats and oils, oil and fat residues of                  0712.90.10
   21                 animal or vegetable origin discarded by food-industry companies, and DL-methionine and its                      Chapter 15
                      analogues; all intended directly for the manufacture of animal feed or directly for animal                      2501.00
                      feeding, except for domestic animals                                                                            2521.00.00
                                                                                                                                       2930.40
   22                 Agronomic services                                                                                              1.1410.90.00
   23                 Agricultural, livestock or agroecology technician services                                                      1.1410.90.00
                                                                                                                                       1.1405.21.00
   24                 Veterinary services for animal production
                                                                                                                                       1.1405.22.00 1.1405.90.00
   25                 Zootechnician services                                                                                          1.1410.90.00
   26                 Insemination and fertilization services for farm animals                                                        1.1405.22.00
   27                 Forestry engineering services                                                                                   1.1403.10.00
   28                 Spraying and pest control services                                                                              1.1901.10.00
   29                 Seeding, fertilizing (including fertilizer mixing), soil repair, planting and harvesting services               1.1901.10.00
   30                 Irrigation and fertirrigation project services                                                                  1.1403.29.00
                      Laboratory analysis services for soils, seeds and other propagative materials, phytosanitary,
   31                                                                                                                                 1.1404.41.00
                      production water, bromatology and animal health
   32                 Licensing of rights over cultivars                                                                              1.1105.10.00
   33                 Definitive assignment of rights over cultivars                                                                  1.1109.10.00
   34                 Genetic improvement of animals and plants and biotechnology, including its royalties
                                                                                                                                       2303.30.00
   35                 Vinasse
                                                                                                                                       2303.20.00


                                                                                ANNEX X

   NATIONAL ARTISTIC, CULTURAL, EVENT-RELATED, JOURNALISTIC AND AUDIOVISUAL PRODUCTIONS SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY
                                                CENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


        ITEM                                                             DESCRIPTION                                                            NBS/NCM
   1                Licensing of copyright and related rights                                                                        1.1103
   2                Licensing of rights to literary works                                                                            1.1103.10.00
   3                Licensing of copyright of cinematographic works                                                                  1.1103.31.00
   4                Licensing of copyright of journalistic works                                                                     1.1103.32.00
   5                Licensing of related rights of performing artists in audiovisual works                                           1.1103.34.00
   6                Licensing of related rights of producers of audiovisual works                                                    1.1103.35.00
   7                Licensing of rights to audiovisual works intended for television                                                 1.1103.36
   8                Licensing of rights to musical works and phonograms                                                              1.1103.4
   9                Temporary assignment of rights to literary works                                                                 1.1106.10.00
   10               Temporary assignment of copyright of cinematographic works                                                       1.1106.31.00
   11               Temporary assignment of copyright of journalistic works                                                          1.1106.32.00
   12               Temporary assignment of related rights of performing artists in audiovisual works                                1.1106.34.00
   13               Temporary assignment of related rights of producers of audiovisual works                                         1.1106.35.00
   14               Temporary assignment of rights to audiovisual works intended for television                                      1.1106.36
   15               Temporary assignment of rights to musical works and phonograms                                                   1.1106.4
   16               Definitive assignment of rights to literary works                                                                1.1107.10.00
   17               Definitive assignment of rights to cinematographic works                                                         1.1107.31.00
   18               Definitive assignment of rights to journalistic works                                                            1.1107.32.00
   19               Definitive assignment of rights to musical works and phonograms                                                  1.1107.40.00
   20               News agency services for newspapers and periodicals                                                              1.1704.10.00
   21               News agency services for audiovisual media                                                                       1.1704.20.00
   22               Assistance and organization services for conventions, trade fairs, exhibitions and other events                  1.1806.6
                    Studio sound recording services intended directly for national artistic, cultural and
   23                                                                                                                                1.2501.11.00
                    audiovisual productions
                    Live sound recording services intended directly for national artistic, cultural and
   24                                                                                                                                1.2501.12.00
                    audiovisual productions
   25               Production services for television programs, videotapes and films                                               1.2501.21.00
   26               Production services for radio programs                                                                           1.2501.22.00
                    Editing services for audiovisual works intended directly for national artistic, cultural and
   27                                                                                                                                1.2501.31.00
                    audiovisual productions
                    Duplication and transfer services for audiovisual works intended directly for national
   28                                                                                                                                1.2501.32.00
                    artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions
                    Color correction and digital restoration services for audiovisual works intended directly for
   29                                                                                                                                1.2501.33.00
                    national artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions
                    Visual effects services in audiovisual works intended directly for national artistic,
   30                                                                                                                                1.2501.34.00
                    cultural and audiovisual productions
   31               Animation services intended directly for national artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions                1.2501.35.00
                    Subtitling, titling and dubbing services in audiovisual works intended directly for national
   32                                                                                                                                1.2501.36.00
                    artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions
                    Sound design and editing services in audiovisual works intended directly for national
   33                                                                                                                                1.2501.37.00
                    artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions
   34               Film projection services                                                                                         1.2501.50.00
   35               Audiovisual production, support and related services not classified in previous subheadings                     1.2501.90.00
   36               Organization and promotion services for live artistic performances                                              1.2502.10.00
                    Production and presentation services for live artistic performances, including tickets relating
   37                                                                                                                                1.2502.20.00
                    to these services
   38               Artistic performance services                                                                                    1.2503.10.00
   39               Services of authors, composers, sculptors, painters and other artists, except performance artists               1.2503.20.00
   40               Museum services, including services relating to art shows and collections                                       1.2504.11.00
   41               Ticket reservation services for events of national artistic, cultural and audiovisual productions               1.1805.32.00
   42               Original artistic photographs                                                                                    4911.91.00
   43               Original artistic paintings, pictures and drawings                                                               9701.91.00
   44               Original artistic engravings, prints and lithographs                                                             9702.90.00
   45               Original works of statuary or sculpture art                                                                      9703.90.00
   46               Licensing of related rights of performing artists                                                                1.1103.42.00
   47               Temporary assignment of copyright and related rights                                                            1.1106
   48               Temporary assignment of related rights of performing artists                                                     1.1106.42.00
   49               Licensing of copyright of theatrical works


   50                  Licensing of related rights of producers of theatrical works
   51                  Licensing of related rights of performing artists in theatrical works
   52                  Temporary assignment of copyright of theatrical works
   53                  Temporary assignment of related rights of performing artists in theatrical works
   54                  Temporary assignment of related rights of performing producers in theatrical works
                       Sound, lighting, costume, videography and set design services for live artistic performances,
   55                                                                                                                                   1.2502.30.00
                       intended for the productions referred to in art. 139 of this Complementary Law
                       Stage rental, assembly and disassembly services, intended for the productions referred to in
   56                                                                                                                                   1.0105.70.00
                       art. 139 of this Complementary Law
                       Presentation and promotion services for artistic performances, including management of
   57                  spaces intended for presentations of performing-arts exhibitions, shows and other productions                    1.2502.90.00
                       referred to in art. 139 of this Complementary Law

                                                                                  ANNEX XI

        GOODS AND SERVICES RELATED TO SOVEREIGNTY AND NATIONAL SECURITY, INFORMATION SECURITY AND CYBERSECURITY
                            SUBJECT TO A 60% (SIXTY PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


               ITEM                                                        DESCRIPTION                                                    NBS / NCM/SH
                 1                    SERVICES RELATED TO SOVEREIGNTY AND NATIONAL SECURITY, INFORMATION SECURITY AND
                                      CYBERSECURITY
                 1.1                  Information Technology (IT) Security                                                         1.1501.20.00
                 1.2                  Design and development services for applications and programs in Information                1.1502.90.00
                                      Technology (IT) not classified in previous subheadings
                 1.3                  Information Technology (IT) services not classified in previous                              1.1510.00.00
                                      subheadings
                 1.4                  (VETOED)                                                                                      1.1802.90.00
                 1.5                  (VETOED)                                                                                      1.1802.30.00
                 1.6                  Locating service for lost or stolen device, for protection of personal                 pending classification
                                      information
                 1.7                  Locking/blocking service for lost or stolen device, for protection of personal         pending classification
                                      information
                 1.8                  (VETOED)                                                                                pending classification
                 1.9                  (VETOED)                                                                                pending classification
                1.10                  Monitoring service for use of personal and corporate data on onion-type                pending classification
                                      networks
                1.11                  Protected and encrypted connection service for devices                                 pending classification
                1.12                  Identification and alert of malicious files or unauthorized changes on                 pending classification
                                      devices that allow access to information
                1.13                  Maintenance and repair services for military vehicles for use by national                    1.2001.35.00
                                      security
                1.14                  Maintenance and repair services for military equipment for use by                            1.2001.83.00
                                      national security
                 2                    GOODS RELATED TO SOVEREIGNTY AND NATIONAL SECURITY, INFORMATION SECURITY AND
                                      CYBERSECURITY
                 2.1                  Military operational vehicle and also its parts and components                                   8709

                 2.2                  Armored car and combat vehicle, ground or amphibious, on tracks or wheels,                    8710.00.00
                                      with or without armament, and also their parts and components
                 2.3                  Other vehicles of any type, for use by Public Security bodies and the                            8709
                                      Armed Forces, with specification of their own by Military and Public
                                      Security Bodies, and also their parts and components


                 2.4                  Military vehicle simulators                                                                    9031.80.99
                 2.5                  Low- or high-speed tractors, for use by Public Security bodies and the                            8701
                                      Armed Forces, on tracks or wheels, intended for engineering or artillery
                                      units, for construction work or for towing heavy equipment, and
                                      also their parts and components
                 2.6                  Radars for military use                                                                       8526.10.00
                 2.7                  Rockets for military use                                                                      9301.20.00
                 2.8                  Explosives for military use                                                                   3602.00.00
                                                                                                                                        9306
                 2.9                  Optronics                                                                                     8525.89.29
                2.10                  Operational rations                                                                          2106.90.30
                2.11                  Sea mines                                                                                       9306

                2.12                  Naval and artillery ammunition cartridges and their components (projectile,                    9306.2
                                      case, primer, fuze, tracer, powder and high-explosive), of caliber equal to or
                                      greater than 40 mm of internal barrel diameter
                2.13                  Bombs, torpedoes, mines, missiles, rockets and their components                                9306



                2.14                  Aircraft, including Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) for use by national                   8802 and 8806
                                      security, and also their parts and components
                2.15                  Space vehicles for use by national security                                              8802.60.00


                2.16                  Parachutes for use by national security                                                  8804.00.00
                2.17                  Apparatus and devices for launching and landing aircraft and space                       8805.10.00
                                      vehicles for use by national security
                2.18                  Flight simulators and similar equipment for use by national security                     8805.21.00
                2.19                  Ground support equipment for use by national security                                       8805


                2.20                  Equipment to assist communication, navigation and air traffic control                       9014.20
                                      for use by national security
                2.21                  Vessels built in the country, their parts, components and items used in the              8901.20.00
                                      repair, servicing and reconstruction of vessels
                                                                                                                                 8906.10.00
                2.22                  Devices intended to provide information security of the Intrusion Prevention             8517.62.59
                                      (IPS) type
                2.23                  Devices intended to provide information security of the Intrusion Detection              8517.62.59
                                      (IDS) type
                2.24                  Authentication Devices (tokens, biometric readers) that ensure                              8523.52
                                      information/cyber security
                                                                                                                                 8471.90.14

                2.25                  Encryption equipment for information/cyber security                                      8471.50.90



                2.26                  Firewalls for information/cyber security                                                 8517.62.59
                                                                                                                                 8471.49.00
                2.27                  Secure switches and routers for information/cyber security                          8517.62.34 8517.62.4

                2.28                  Encrypted communication devices for information/cyber                                    8517.62.7
                                      security

                2.29                  Encrypted storage units for information/cyber security                                    8523.51


                2.30                  Secure storage servers for information/cyber security                                     8523.51


                                                                               ANNEX XII

                                 MEDICAL DEVICES SUBJECT TO REDUCTION TO ZERO OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


    ITEM                                                           DESCRIPTION                                                                 NCM/SH
      1     Electrodiagnostic apparatus (including functional exploration apparatus and physiological
            parameter checking apparatus)

     1.1    Electrocardiographs                                                                                                             9018.11.00
     1.2    Electroencephalographs                                                                                                          9018.19.80
     1.3    Electrodiagnostic apparatus, except products classified in codes 9018.11.00, 9018.12.10, 9018.12.90,                            9018.19.80
            9018.13.00, 9018.14.10, 9018.14.20, 9018.14.90, 9018.19.10 and 9018.19.20


      2     Ultraviolet or infrared ray apparatus                                                                                             9018.20
      3     Orthopedic articles and apparatus                                                                                                9021.10.10
      4     Articles and apparatus for fractures                                                                                             9021.10.20
      5     Prosthetic articles and apparatus, except dental ones and products classified in codes 9021.39.91 and 9021.39.99                    9021.3


      6     Computed tomography scanner                                                                                                      9022.12.00
      7     Mobile X-ray apparatus, except products classified in code 9022.19.91                                                              9022.13
                                                                                                                                              9022.14
                                                                                                                                              9022.19
      8     Radiocobalt apparatus (cobalt bomb)                                                                                              9022.21.10
      9     Cryotherapy apparatus                                                                                                            9018.90.99
      10    Gamma-therapy apparatus                                                                                                          9022.21.20
      11    Apparatus using alpha, beta, gamma or other ionizing radiations, for medical, surgical,                                          9022.21.90
            dental or veterinary use, including radiophotography or radiotherapy apparatus, except products
            classified in codes 9022.21.10 and 9022.21.20
      12    Densimeters, areometers, liquid-weighing instruments and similar floating instruments, thermometers, pyrometers,                    90.25
            barometers, hygrometers and psychrometers, whether or not recording, even combined with one another


      13    Ventilator                                                                                                                       9019.20.40



       14     Multiparameter monitor                                                                                                  9018.19.80
       15     Infusion pump                                                                                                           9018.90.10
       16     Magnetic resonance imaging diagnostic apparatus                                                                          9018.13.00

       17     Ultrasound apparatus                                                                                                     9018.12

                                                                             ANNEX XIII

   ACCESSIBILITY DEVICES SUITABLE FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES SUBJECT TO REDUCTION TO ZERO OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


            ITEM                                                       DESCRIPTION                                                       NCM/SH
   1                    Grab bar for people with physical disabilities                                                          8302.41.00
   2                    WHEELCHAIRS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES, EVEN WITH MOTOR OR OTHER PROPULSION MECHANISM
   2.1                  Without propulsion mechanism                                                                            8713.10.00
                        Motorized wheelchairs
   2.2                  or with another propulsion mechanism, and other vehicles for people with disabilities, even with motor 8713.90.00
                        or other propulsion mechanism
                        Parts and accessories intended exclusively for use in wheelchairs or in other vehicles
   3                                                                                                                            8714.20.00
                        for people with disabilities
   4                    Apparatus to assist hearing for the deaf, except parts and accessories                                  9021.40.00
   5                    Parts and accessories of apparatus to assist hearing for the deaf                                       9021.90.92
   6                    Cochlear implants                                                                                       9021.90.19

                                                                             ANNEX XIV
                                                          (Repealed by Complementary Law No. 227 of 2026)

                                        MEDICINES SUBJECT TO REDUCTION TO ZERO OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


            ITEM                                                       DESCRIPTION                                                       NCM/SH
             1                                                          ABACAVIR                                                      3004.90.69
             2                                                        ABEMACICLIB                                                     3004.90.69
             3                                                      ACALABRUTINIB                                                     3004.90.69
             4                                           METHYLPREDNISOLONE ACEPONATE                                                  3004.32.10
             5                                                 ABIRATERONE ACETATE                                                     3004.32.90
             6                                                 CYPROTERONE ACETATE                                                     3004.39.39
             7                                                  DEGARELIX ACETATE                                                      3004.39.29
             8                                                GOSERELIN ACETATE                                                        3004.39.27
             9                                               LEUPRORELIN ACETATE                                                       3004.39.19
             10                                                 MEGESTROL ACETATE                                                      3004.39.36
             11                                                OCTREOTIDE ACETATE                                                      3004.39.29
             12                                               TRIPTORELIN ACETATE                                                      3004.39.18
             13                                                DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE                                                    3004.39.29
             14                                                 FOLINIC (FOLIC) ACID                                                   3004.50.90
             15                                                   TRANEXAMIC ACID                                                      3004.90.39
             16                                                   ZOLEDRONIC ACID                                                      3004.90.69
             17                                                        ACITRETIN                                                       3004.90.29
             18                                                       AFLIBERCEPT                                                      3002.15.90
             19                                                ALBINTERFERON ALFA-2B                                                   3002.15.90
             20                                                    HUMAN ALBUMIN                                                       3002.12.39
             21                                                 ALENDRONATE SODIUM                                                     3004.90.59
             22                                                      ALEMTUZUMAB                                                       3002.15.90
             23                                                   ALGLUCOSIDASE ALFA                                                   3004.90.19
             24                                                     ELOSULFASE ALFA                                                    3004.90.19
             25                                                       EPOETIN ALFA                                                     3002.12.39
             26                                                    INTERFERON ALFA                                                     3002.15.90
             27                                                PEGINTERFERON ALFA-2A                                                   3002.15.10
             28                                                PEGINTERFERON ALFA-2B                                                   3002.15.90
             29                                                     THYROTROPIN ALFA                                                   3004.39.29
             30                                                    VESTRONIDASE ALFA                                                   3004.90.19
             31                                                         ALPELISIB                                                      3004.90.79
             32                                                         ALTEPLASE                                                      3004.90.19
             33                                                      AMBRISENTAN                                                       3004.90.79
             34                                                        AMIFOSTINE                                                      3004.90.59
             35                                                       ANASTROZOLE                                                      3004.90.69


           36                                                      AMPHOTERICIN B                 3004.20.99
           37                                           LIPOSOMAL AMPHOTERICIN B                  3004.20.95
           38                                                 PENTAVALENT ANTIMONIAL              3004.90.29
           39                                                       APALUTAMIDE                   3004.90.69
           40                                                       APREPITANT                    3004.90.78
           41                                                        ARTEMETHER                   3004.60.00
           42                                                ARTEMETHER + LUMEFANTRINE            3004.60.00
           43                                       ARTESUNATE + MEFLOQUINE HYDROCHLORIDE         3004.60.00
           44                                                  SODIUM ARTESUNATE                  3004.60.00
           45                                                      ASPARAGINASE                   3004.90.12
           46                                                        ATENOLOL                     3004.90.42
           47                                                      ATEZOLIZUMAB                   3002.15.90
           48                                                        AVELUMAB                     3002.15.90
           49                                                         AXITINIB                    3004.90.69
           50                                                       AZACITIDINE                   3004.90.79
           51                                                       AZATHIOPRINE                  3004.90.66
           52                                                       BARICITINIB                   3004.90.79
           53                                                      BENZNIDAZOLE                   3004.90.69
           54                                                  AMLODIPINE BESYLATE                3004.90.69
           55                                                      EPOETIN BETA                   3002.12.39
           56                                                      BEVACIZUMAB                    3002.15.20
           57                                                       BICALUTAMIDE                  3004.90.59
           58                                                         BIOTIN                      2936.29.31
           59                                                     BLINATUMOMAB                    3002.15.90
           60                                                       BORTEZOMIB                    3004.90.68
           61                                                 BRENTUXIMAB VEDOTIN                 3002.15.90
           62                                                       BRIGATINIB                    3004.90.69
           63                                                 IPRATROPIUM BROMIDE                 3004.49.90
           64                                                       BUDESONIDE                    3004.39.99
           65                                                       BUROSUMAB                     3002.15.80
           66                                                       BUSULFAN                      3004.90.95
           67                                                       CABAZITAXEL                   3004.90.59
           68                                                       CAPECITABINE                  3004.90.79
           69                                                  CARBIDOPA + LEVODOPA               3004.90.35
           70                                                      CARBOPLATIN                    3004.90.99
           71                                                      CARFILZOMIB                    3004.90.79
           72                                                       CARMUSTINE                    3004.90.48
           73                                                       CEFALOTIN                     3004.20.59
           74                                                        CEFOXITIN                    3004.20.59
           75                                                       CEFTAZIDIME                   3004.20.59
           76                                                       CELECOXIB                     3004.90.79
           77                                                       CETUXIMAB                     3002.15.90
           78                                                     CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE                3004.90.79
           79                                               SODIUM CILASTATIN + IMIPENEM          3004.20.94
           80                                                        CISPLATIN                    3004.90.99
           81                                                        CYTARABINE                   3004.90.79
           82                                                   IXAZOMIB CITRATE                  3004.90.59
           84                                                  TAMOXIFEN CITRATE                  3004.90.34
           85                                                        CLADRIBINE                   3004.90.79
           86                                                  DISODIUM CLODRONATE                3004.90.58
           87                                                       CLOFAZIMINE                   3004.90.69
           88                                                      CHLORAMBUCIL                   3004.90.38
           89                                                RADIUM CHLORIDE (RA 223)              2844.42.00
           90                                                    SODIUM CHLORIDE                  2501.00.90
           91                                                SUXAMETHONIUM CHLORIDE               3004.90.99
           92                                                ALECTINIB HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.79
           93                                     ALFENTANIL HYDROCHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE            3004.90.69
           94                                    METHYL AMINOLEVULINATE HYDROCHLORIDE             3004.90.39
           95                                               CINACALCET HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.39


           96                                           DAUNORUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE                3004.20.69
           97                                                DOBUTAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE             3004.90.39
           98                                           DOXORUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE                 3004.20.69
           99                                               EPIRUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.20.99
          100                                                ERLOTINIB HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.68
          101                                               FINGOLIMOD HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.39
          102                                               GEMCITABINE HYDROCHLORIDE             3004.90.78
          103                                           GRANISETRON HYDROCHLORIDE                 3004.49.90
          104                                               IDARUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.20.69
          105                                               IRINOTECAN HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.49.90
          106                                    IRINOTECAN HYDROCHLORIDE TRIHYDRATE              3004.49.90
          107                                          METOCLOPRAMIDE HYDROCHLORIDE               3004.90.41
          108                                               MITOXANTRONE HYDROCHLORIDE            3004.90.39
          109                                           PALONOSETRON HYDROCHLORIDE                3004.90.69
          110                                                PAZOPANIB HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.79
          111                                                PYRIDOXINE HYDROCHLORIDE             3004.50.90
          112                                                PONATINIB HYDROCHLORIDE              3004.90.69
          113                                               TOPOTECAN HYDROCHLORIDE               3004.49.10
          114                                    ZIPRASIDONE HYDROCHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE            3004.90.79
          115                                 PARTIALLY ACTIVATED PROTHROMBIN COMPLEX             3002.12.39

          116                                                       CRIZOTINIB                    3004.90.69
          117                                                      DACARBAZINE                    3004.90.68
          118                                                     DAPAGLIFLOZIN                   3004.90.59
          119                                                     DARATUMUMAB                     3002.15.90
          120                                                      DAROLUTAMIDE                   3004.90.69
          121                                                       DASATINIB                     3004.90.79
          122                                                       DECITABINE                    3004.90.79
          123                                                      DEFERASIROX                    3004.90.69
          124                                                      DENOSUMAB                      3002.15.90
          125                                                     DEXAMETHASONE                   3004.32.90
          126                                               PASIREOTIDE DIASPARTATE               3004.39.29
          127                                                        DIAZEPAM                     3004.90.64
          128                                               DACLATASVIR DIHYDROCHLORIDE           3004.90.69
          129                                   PRAMIPEXOLE DIHYDROCHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE           3004.90.79
          130                                                 QUININE DIHYDROCHLORIDE             3004.49.90
          131                                           SAPROPTERIN DIHYDROCHLORIDE               3004.90.69
          132                                                       DIDANOSINE                    3004.90.79
          133                                                   DIETHYLSTILBESTROL                3004.90.95
          134                                                CHLOROQUINE DIPHOSPHATE              3004.90.69
          135                                                  AFATINIB DIMALEATE                 3004.90.79
          136                                          TRAMETINIB DIMETHYL SULFOXIDE              3004.90.69
          137                                               VINORELBINE DITARTRATE                3004.49.90
          138                                                       DOCETAXEL                     3004.90.59
          139                                                 DOCETAXEL TRIHYDRATE                3004.90.59
          140                                                  DOLUTEGRAVIR SODIUM                3004.90.79
          141                                                DOXYCYCLINE MONOHYDRATE              3004.20.99
          142                                                      DURVALUMAB                     3002.15.90
          143                                                      ECULIZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          144                                                        EFAVIRENZ                    3004.90.78
          145                                                      ELEXACAFTOR                    3004.90.69
          146                                                      ELOTUZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          147                                                 ELTROMBOPAG OLAMINE                 3004.90.69
          148                                               TRIPTORELIN PAMOATE (EMBONATE)        3004.39.18
          149                                                      EMICIZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          150                                                      EMTRICITABINE                  3004.90.78
          151                              NORETHISTERONE ENANTHATE + ESTRADIOL VALERATE          3004.30.39

          152                                                       ENFLURANE                     3004.90.99
          153                                                       ENFUVIRTIDE                   3004.90.68


          154                                                      EMTRICITABINE                  3004.90.78
          155                                EMTRICITABINE + TENOFOVIR DISOPROXIL FUMARATE        3004.90.78

          156                                                      ENZALUTAMIDE                   3004.90.69
          157                                                      ERDAFITINIB                    3004.90.69
          158                                                 NINTEDANIB ESYLATE                  3004.90.69
          159                                                    SPIRONOLACTONE                   3004.32.20
          160                                                       STAVUDINE                     3004.90.79
          161                                         ETHINYLESTRADIOL + LEVONORGESTREL           3004.39.39
          162                                                       ETOMIDATE                     3004.90.69
          163                                                       ETOPOSIDE                     3004.90.78
          164                                                       ETRAVIRINE                    3004.90.69
          165                                                      EVEROLIMUS                     3004.90.78
          166                                                      EXEMESTANE                     3004.39.94
          167                                                 COAGULATION FACTOR IX               3002.12.39
          168                                 RECOMBINANT ACTIVATED COAGULATION FACTOR VII        3002.12.39

          169                                                COAGULATION FACTOR VIII              3002.12.39
          170                         COAGULATION FACTOR VIII CONTAINING VON WILLEBRAND FACTOR    3002.12.39

          171                                     RECOMBINANT COAGULATION FACTOR VIII             3002.12.39
          172                                                        FENTANYL                     3004.90.69
          173                                                       FILGRASTIM                    3002.15.90
          174                                                      FLUOROURACIL                   3004.90.69
          175                                                   CALCIUM FOLINATE                  3004.50.10
          176                                                 FOSAMPRENAVIR CALCIUM               3004.90.78
          177                                                 FLUDARABINE PHOSPHATE               3004.90.78
          178                                                 OSELTAMIVIR PHOSPHATE               3004.90.49
          179                                                 RUXOLITINIB PHOSPHATE               3004.90.69
          180                                                 SITAGLIPTIN PHOSPHATE               3004.90.69
          181                                                      FOTEMUSTINE                    3004.90.58
          182                                                      FULVESTRANT                    3004.39.36
          183                                                  DIMETHYL FUMARATE                  3004.90.29
          184                                       TENOFOVIR DISOPROXIL FUMARATE                 3004.90.68
          185                                                       FUROSEMIDE                    3004.90.76
          186                                                       GALSULFASE                    3004.90.19
          187                                                   SODIUM GANCICLOVIR                3004.90.69
          188                                                       GEFITINIB                     3004.90.79
          189                                                        GLUCOSE                      3004.90.99
          190                                                      GOLIMUMAB                      3002.15.90
          191                                                      GOSERELIN                      3004.39.27
          192                                                      GRANISETRON                    3004.49.50
          193                                                      HALOPERIDOL                    3004.90.69
          194                                                      HYDROXYUREA                    3004.90.99
          195                                                  SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE                3004.90.99
          196                                                   IBANDRONATE SODIUM                3004.90.59
          197                                                       IBRUTINIB                     3004.90.69
          198                                                      IDARUBICIN                     3004.20.63
          199                                                      IDURSULFASE                    3004.90.14
          200                                                       IFOSFAMIDE                    3004.90.79
          201                                               ANTI-RABIES IMMUNOGLOBULIN            3002.12.39
          202                                               ANTI-TETANUS IMMUNOGLOBULIN           3002.12.39
          203                                      HUMAN ANTI-HEPATITIS B IMMUNOGLOBULIN          3002.12.39
          204                                                    INSULIN GLARGINE                 3004.31.00
          205                                                    HUMAN INSULIN                    3004.31.00
          206                                     INTERFERON ALFA-2A AND INTERFERON ALFA-2B       3002.15.90
          207                                                       IOPAMIDOL                     3006.30.13
          208                                                       IPILIMUMAB                    3002.15.90
          209                                                PENTAMIDINE ISETIONATE               3004.90.47
          210                                                       ISOFLURANE                    3004.90.99
          211                                                      ISOTRETINOIN                   3004.50.90


          212                                                       IVACAFTOR                     3004.90.69
          213                                                 LAMIVUDINE + ZIDOVUDINE             3004.90.79
          214                                                       LETROZOLE                     3004.90.68
          215                                                     LEVETIRACETAM                   3004.90.69
          216                                                       LIDOCAINE                     3004.90.43
          217                                                       LINEZOLID                     3004.90.79
          218                                                    LIPEGFILGRASTIM                  3002.15.90
          219                                                  LOPINAVIR + RITONAVIR              3004.90.68
          220                                                  LOSARTAN POTASSIUM                 3004.90.69
          221                                                      LUMACAFTOR                     3004.90.69
          222                                    ACALABRUTINIB MALEATE MONOHYDRATE                3004.90.69
          223                                                  SUNITINIB MALEATE                  3004.90.69
          224                                                   TIMOLOL MALEATE                   3004.90.79
          225                                                      MARAVIROC                      3004.90.49
          226                                                     MEPOLIZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          227                                                    MERCAPTOPURINE                   3004.90.63
          228                                                DABRAFENIB MESYLATE                  3004.90.79
          229                                               DEFEROXAMINE MESYLATE                 3004.90.48
          230                                                  IMATINIB MESYLATE                  3004.90.68
          231                                                 NELFINAVIR MESYLATE                 3004.90.68
          232                                                OSIMERTINIB MESYLATE                 3004.90.69
          233                                                 RASAGILINE MESYLATE                 3004.90.39
          234                                                         MESNA                       3004.90.59
          235                                                   METHYLPREDNISOLONE                3004.90.99
          236                                                      METHOTREXATE                   3004.90.69
          237                                                 SODIUM METHOTREXATE                 3004.90.69
          238                                                MYCOPHENOLATE MOFETIL                3004.90.79
          239                                                 SODIUM MYCOPHENOLATE                3004.90.59
          240                                                       MIDAZOLAM                     3004.90.69
          241                                                     MIDOSTAURIN                     3004.90.79
          242                                                      MIFAMURTIDE                    3004.90.59
          243                                                       MITOMYCIN                     3004.20.91
          244                                                        MITOTANE                     3004.90.95
          245                                                       NEVIRAPINE                    3004.90.68
          246                                                       NILOTINIB                     3004.90.69
          247                                                      NITRENDIPINE                   3004.90.69
          248                                                      NIVOLUMAB                      3002.15.90
          249                                                      NUSINERSEN                     3004.90.79
          250                                                     OCRELIZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          251                                                      OCTREOTIDE                     3004.39.26
          252                                                       OLAPARIB                      3004.90.69
          253                                                      OLARATUMAB                     3002.15.90
          254                                          ONASEMNOGENE ABEPARVOVEC                   3002.90.00
          255                                                      OXALIPLATIN                    3004.90.99
          256                                                       PACLITAXEL                    3004.90.59
          257                                                      PALBOCICLIB                    3004.90.69
          258                                                 DISODIUM PAMIDRONATE                3004.90.59
          259                                                 PASIREOTIDE PAMOATE                 3004.39.29
          260                                                      PANCREATIN                     3004.90.19
          261                                                     PANITUMUMAB                     3002.15.90
          262                                                 PEG INTERFERON ALFA-2B              3002.15.90
          263                                                 PEG INTERFERON ALFA-2A              3002.15.10
          264                                                     PEGASPARGASE                    3004.90.19
          265                                                     PEGFILGRASTIM                   3002.15.90
          266                                                 DISODIUM PEMETREXED                 3004.90.69
          267                                   DISODIUM PEMETREXED HEMIPENTAHYDRATE              3004.90.69
          268                                      DISODIUM PEMETREXED HEPTAHYDRATE               3004.90.69
          269                                                      PERTUZUMAB                     3002.15.90
          270                                                      PIOGLITAZONE                   3004.90.79


          271                      PYRAZINAMIDE + RIFAMPICIN + ETHAMBUTOL HYDROCHLORIDE + ISONIAZID   3002.20.32

          272                                                      PLERIXAFOR                          3004.90.69
          273                                                     PRAZIQUANTEL                         3004.90.63
          274                                                     PREDNISOLONE                         3004.32.10
          275                                                     PREGABALIN                           3004.90.39
          276                                                       PROPOFOL                           3004.90.95
          277                                                        QUININE                           3004.49.90
          278                                                  SODIUM RABEPRAZOLE                      3004.90.69
          279                                                     RALTEGRAVIR                          3004.90.49
          280                                                    RAMUCIRUMAB                           3002.15.90
          281                                                     RASBURICASE                          3004.90.19
          282                                                     REGORAFENIB                          3004.90.69
          283                                                       RIBAVIRIN                          3004.90.79
          284                                                RIFAMPICIN + ISONIAZID                    3004.20.32
          285                                                        RILUZOLE                          3004.90.69
          286                                                    RISANKIZUMAB                          3002.15.90
          287                                                       RISDIPLAM                          3004.90.69
          288                                                     RISPERIDONE                          3004.90.69
          289                                                       RITONAVIR                          3004.90.78
          290                                                      RITUXIMAB                           3002.15.20
          291                                     SACUBITRIL SODIUM VALSARTAN HYDRATE                  3004.90.69
          292                                                      SAQUINAVIR                          3004.90.68
          293                                                     SAXAGLIPTIN                          3004.90.69
          294                                                    SECUKINUMAB                           3002.15.90
          295                                                     SELEXIPAG                            3004.90.79
          296                                                     SIMVASTATIN                          3004.90.59
          297                                                      SOFOSBUVIR                          3004.90.79
          298                                                     SOMATROPIN                           3004.39.29
          299                            ANTI-ARACHNID SERUM (LOXOSCELES, PHONEUTRIA AND TITYUS)       3002.12.11

          300                                        ANTI-BOTHROPIC SERUM (PENTAVALENT)                3002.12.11
          301                              ANTI-BOTHROPIC (PENTAVALENT) AND ANTI-CROTALIC SERUM        3002.12.11

          302                              ANTI-BOTHROPIC (PENTAVALENT) AND ANTI-LACHESIC SERUM        3002.12.11

          303                                         ANTI-BOTULINUM SERUM AB (BIVALENT)               3002.12.19
          304                                                  ANTI-CROTALIC SERUM                     3002.12.11
          305                                                  ANTI-DIPHTHERIA SERUM                   3002.12.15
          306                                           ANTI-ELAPID SERUM (BIVALENT)                   3002.12.11
          307                                                ANTI-SCORPION SERUM                       3002.12.11
          308                                                  ANTI-LONOMIA SERUM                      3002.12.11
          309                                        ANTI-LOXOSCELES SERUM (TRIVALENT)                 3002.12.11
          310                                                   ANTI-RABIES SERUM                      3002.12.19
          311                                                  ANTI-TETANUS SERUM                      3002.12.12
          312                                               METOPROLOL SUCCINATE                       3004.90.39
          313                                               RIBOCICLIB SUCCINATE                       3004.90.69
          314                                       HYDROCORTISONE SODIUM SUCCINATE                    3004.32.10
          315                                                     SULFADIAZINE                         3004.90.72
          316                                          SULFAMETHOXAZOLE + TRIMETHOPRIM                 3004.90.72
          317                                                  ABACAVIR SULFATE                        3004.90.68
          318                                                 ATAZANAVIR SULFATE                       3004.90.68
          319                                                 BLEOMYCIN SULFATE                        3004.20.93
          320                                                  INDINAVIR SULFATE                       3004.90.68
          321                                               LAROTRECTINIB SULFATE                      3004.90.69
          322                                                  MORPHINE SULFATE                        3004.49.90
          323                                         MORPHINE SULFATE PENTAHYDRATE                    3004.49.90
          324                                                  QUININE SULFATE                         3004.49.90
          325                                                VINCRISTINE SULFATE                       3004.49.10
          326                                                      TACROLIMUS                          3004.90.78
          327                                                 TAFAMIDIS MEGLUMINE                      3004.90.79



          328                                                       TAMOXIFEN                            3004.90.34
          329                                                VARENICLINE TARTRATE                       3004.90.69
          330                                                VINORELBINE TARTRATE                       3004.49.90
          331                                                      TEMOZOLOMIDE                         3004.90.68
          332                                                      TENECTEPLASE                         3004.90.19
          333                                                       TENIPOSIDE                          3004.90.78
          334                                                        TENOFOVIR                          3004.90.68
          335                                                       TEMSIROLIMUS                        3004.90.78
          336                                                      TERIFLUNOMIDE                        3004.90.49
          337                                                        TERIZIDONE                         3004.90.79
          338                                                       TETRACYCLINE                        3004.20.99
          339                                                       TEZACAFTOR                          3004.90.69
          340                                                        THIOGUANINE                        3004.90.68
          341                                                        TIPRANAVIR                         3004.90.78
          342                                                       TOCILIZUMAB                         3002.15.90
          343                                                 SORAFENIB TOSYLATE                        3004.90.69
          344                                                      TRASTUZUMAB                          3002.15.20
          345                                                   ARSENIC TRIOXIDE                        3004.90.99
          346                                                      TRIPTORELIN                          3004.39.18
          347                                               UPADACITINIB HEMIHYDRATE                    3004.90.69
          348                                                       VANCOMYCIN                          3004.20.71
          349                                                       VANDETANIB                          3004.90.69
          350                                                      VEDOLIZUMAB                          3002.15.90
          351                                                       VINBLASTINE                         3004.49.10
          352                                                        VINCRISTINE                        3004.49.10
          353                                                        VINFLUNINE                         3004.90.79
          354                                                       VINORELBINE                         3004.49.90
          355                                                        ZIAGENAVIR                         3004.90.68
          356                                                        ZIDOVUDINE                         3004.90.79
          357                                        DIPHTHERIA AND TETANUS ADSORBED VACCINE            3002.41.29
          358                                  DIPHTHERIA, TETANUS AND PERTUSSIS ADSORBED VACCINE       3002.41.27
          359                           DIPHTHERIA, TETANUS AND PERTUSSIS (ACELLULAR) ADSORBED VACCINE  3002.41.27


          360                 ADSORBED DIPHTHERIA, TETANUS, PERTUSSIS, HEPATITIS B (RECOMBINANT) AND   3002.41.29
                                              HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZAE B (CONJUGATE) VACCINE

          361                                      HEPATITIS A (INACTIVATED) ADSORBED VACCINE                3002.41.29
          362                                                        BCG VACCINE                           3002.41.29
          363                                                 CHOLERA (INACTIVATED) VACCINE                   3002.41.29
          364                                                      COVID-19 VACCINE                        3002.41.29
          365                                                 DENGUE 1, 2, 3 AND 4 VACCINE                   3002.41.29
          366                                          YELLOW FEVER (ATTENUATED) VACCINE                    3002.41.29
          367                                      TYPHOID FEVER (POLYSACCHARIDE) VACCINE                 3002.41.29
          368                                  HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZAE B (CONJUGATE) VACCINE                3002.41.29
          369                                          HEPATITIS B (RECOMBINANT) VACCINE                   3002.41.23
          370                             TRIVALENT INFLUENZA (FRAGMENTED, INACTIVATED) VACCINE            3002.41.21

          371                                     MENINGOCOCCAL ACWY (CONJUGATE) VACCINE                   3002.41.25
          372                                       MENINGOCOCCAL C (CONJUGATE) VACCINE                    3002.41.25
          373                           HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS 6, 11, 16 AND 18 (RECOMBINANT) VACCINE         3002.41.29

          374                                  10-VALENT PNEUMOCOCCAL (CONJUGATE) VACCINE                 3002.41.29
          375                                  13-VALENT PNEUMOCOCCAL (CONJUGATE) VACCINE                 3002.41.29
          376                               23-VALENT PNEUMOCOCCAL (POLYSACCHARIDE) VACCINE              3002.41.29

          377                                        POLIOMYELITIS 1 AND 3 (ATTENUATED) VACCINE                 3002.41.22
          378                                       POLIOMYELITIS 1, 2 AND 3 (INACTIVATED) VACCINE              3002.41.22
          379                                                  RABIES (INACTIVATED) VACCINE                   3002.41.29
          380                                    HUMAN ROTAVIRUS G1P 8 (ATTENUATED) VACCINE                 3002.41.29
          381                                        MEASLES, MUMPS, RUBELLA VACCINE                     3002.41.27
          382                           MEASLES, MUMPS, RUBELLA AND VARICELLA (ATTENUATED) VACCINE            3002.41.29

          383                                                VARICELLA (ATTENUATED) VACCINE                   3002.41.29

                                                                              ANNEX XV

            HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTS, FRUITS AND EGGS SUBJECT TO A 100% (ONE HUNDRED PERCENT) REDUCTION OF THE IBS AND CBS RATES


     ITEM                                                                  PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
       1       Eggs of subheading 0407.2 of the NCM/SH
               Horticultural products of headings 07.01, 07.02.00.00, 07.03, 07.04, 07.05, 07.06, 0707.00.00, 07.08, 07.09 and 07.10, except mushrooms and truffles
       2
               classified under subheading 0709.5 and code 0710.80.00 of the NCM/SH
               Fresh or chilled fruits and frozen fruits without added sugar or other sweeteners, classified under headings 08.03, 08.04, 08.05,
       3
               08.06, 08.07, 08.08, 08.09, 08.10 and 08.11 of the NCM/SH
               Plants and floriculture products related to horticulture and grown for food, ornamental or medicinal purposes, classified under Chapter 6
       4
               of the NCM/SH
       5       Roots and tubers of heading 07.14 of the NCM/SH
       6       Coconuts of subheading 0801.1 of the NCM/SH

                                                                              ANNEX XVI

                           LOWER LIMIT FOR SETTING THE OWN RATE AS A PROPORTION OF THE REFERENCE RATE


                                   Year                                     Lower Limit for Setting the Own Rate as a Proportion of the Reference Rate
                                   2029                                                                              81.0%
                                   2030                                                                              81.0%
                                   2031                                                                              81.0%
                                   2032                                                                              81.0%
                                   2033                                                                              90.5%
                                   2034                                                                              88.6%
                                   2035                                                                              86.7%
                                   2036                                                                              84.8%
                                   2037                                                                              82.9%
                                   2038                                                                              81.0%
                                   2039                                                                              79.1%
                                   2040                                                                              77.2%
                                   2041                                                                              75.3%
                                   2042                                                                              73.4%
                                   2043                                                                              71.5%
                                   2044                                                                              69.6%
                                   2045                                                                              67.7%
                                   2046                                                                              65.8%
                                   2047                                                                              63.9%
                                   2048                                                                              62.0%
                                   2049                                                                              60.1%
                                   2050                                                                              58.2%
                                   2051                                                                              56.3%
                                   2052                                                                              54.4%
                                   2053                                                                              52.5%
                                   2054                                                                              50.6%
                                   2055                                                                              48.7%
                                   2056                                                                              46.8%
                                   2057                                                                              44.9%
                                   2058                                                                              43.0%
                                   2059                                                                              41.1%
                                   2060                                                                              39.2%
                                   2061                                                                              37.3%
                                   2062                                                                              35.4%
                                   2063                                                                              33.5%
                                   2064                                                                              31.6%
                                   2065                                                                              29.7%
                                   2066                                                                              27.8%
                                   2067                                                                              25.9%
                                   2068                                                                              24.0%
                                   2069                                                                              22.1%
                                   2070                                                                              20.2%
                                   2071                                                                              18.3%



                                  2072                                                                             16.4%
                                  2073                                                                             14.5%
                                  2074                                                                             12.6%
                                  2075                                                                             10.7%
                                  2076                                                                             8.8%
                                  2077                                                                             6.9%

                                                                           ANNEX XVII

                                                      GOODS AND SERVICES SUBJECT TO THE SELECTIVE TAX


                                                                              Vehicles
   87.03; 8704.21 (except trucks); 8704.31 (except trucks); 8704.41.00 (except trucks); 8704.51.00 (except trucks); 8704.60.00
   (except trucks); 8704.90.00 (except trucks); excluding vehicles with technical characteristics specific to operational use by the Armed
   Forces or Public Security bodies
                                                                    Aircraft and Vessels
   8802, except code 8802.60.00; and motorized vessels classified under heading 8903; excluding aircraft and vessels with technical
   characteristics specific to operational use by the Armed Forces or Public Security bodies
                                                                       Tobacco products
   2401; 2402; 2403; 2404
                                                                        Alcoholic beverages
   2203; 2204; 2205; 2206; 2208
                                                                       Sugary beverages
   2202.10.00
                                                                          Mineral goods
   2601; 2709.00.10; 2711.11.00; 2711.21.00
                                                            Prognostic contests and Fantasy sport

                                                                ANNEX XVIII     Entry into effect

                                                      (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                              ANNEX I

                                                        Simples Nacional Rates and Distribution - Trade

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                For calendar years 2027 and 2028


                               Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                               Rate                    Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                           (in R$)
   1st Bracket          Up to 180,000.00                                                            4.00%                                  -
   2nd Bracket          From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                7.30%                              5,940.00
   3rd Bracket          From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                9.50%                             13,860.00
   4th Bracket          From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                              10.70%                            22,500.00
   5th Bracket          From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                            14.30%                            87,300.00
   6th Bracket          From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                            18.90%                            378,000.00




           Brackets                                                         Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                  CSLL                    CBS                       CPP                 ICMS                   IBS
          1st Bracket                5.50%                 3.50%                   15.33%                    41.50%              34.00%                 0.17%
          2nd Bracket                5.50%                 3.50%                   15.33%                    41.50%              34.00%                 0.17%
          3rd Bracket                5.50%                 3.50%                   15.33%                    42.00%              33.50%                 0.17%
          4th Bracket                5.50%                 3.50%                   15.33%                    42.00%              33.50%                 0.17%
          5th Bracket                5.50%                 3.50%                   15.33%                    42.00%              33.50%                 0.17%
          6th Bracket                13.58%                10.06%                  34.02%                    42.34%

                                                             Simples Nacional Rates - Trade

                                                                       (In effect: 1/1/2029)

                                                                  Starting calendar year 2029


                               Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                               Rate                    Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                           (in R$)
   1st Bracket          Up to 180,000.00                                                            4.00%                                  -
   2nd Bracket          From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                7.30%                              5,940.00


   3rd Bracket              From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                9.50%                          13,860.00
   4th Bracket              From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                             10.70%                          22,500.00
   5th Bracket              From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                           14.30%                          87,300.00
   6th Bracket              From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                           19.00%                         378,000.00

                                                                 Simples Nacional Distribution - Trade

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                       For calendar year 2029


           Brackets                                                            Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                 CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                 ICMS              IBS
          1st Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  41.50%               30.60%           3.40%
          2nd Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  41.50%               30.60%           3.40%
          3rd Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               30.15%           3.35%
          4th Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               30.15%           3.35%
          5th Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               30.15%           3.35%
          6th Bracket                   13.50%               10.00%                   34.40%                  42.10%

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                       For calendar year 2030


           Brackets                                                            Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                 CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                 ICMS              IBS
          1st Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  41.50%               27.20%           6.80%
          2nd Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  41.50%               27.20%           6.80%
          3rd Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               26.80%           6.70%
          4th Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               26.80%           6.70%
          5th Bracket                   5.50%                 3.50%                   15.50%                  42.00%               26.80%           6.70%
          6th Bracket                   13.50%               10.00%                   34.40%                  42.10%

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                       For calendar year 2031


          Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                     IRPJ                 CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                ICMS               IBS
          1st Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   41.50%           23.80%              10.20%
          2nd Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   41.50%           23.80%              10.20%
          3rd Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           23.45%              10.05%
          4th Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           23.45%              10.05%
          5th Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           23.45%              10.05%
          6th Bracket                  13.50%                10.00%                 34.40%                   42.10%

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                       For calendar year 2032


          Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                     IRPJ                 CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                ICMS               IBS
          1st Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   41.50%           20.40%              13.60%
          2nd Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   41.50%           20.40%              13.60%
          3rd Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           20.10%              13.40%
          4th Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           20.10%              13.40%
          5th Bracket                  5.50%                 3.50%                  15.50%                   42.00%           20.10%              13.40%
          6th Bracket                  13.50%                10.00%                 34.40%                   42.10%

                                                                          (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                     Starting calendar year 2033


              Brackets                                                           Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                             IRPJ                    CSLL                         CBS                   CPP                    IBS
              1st Bracket                      5.50%                   3.50%                      15.50%                  41.50%                 34.00%
              2nd Bracket                      5.50%                   3.50%                      15.50%                  41.50%                 34.00%
              3rd Bracket                      5.50%                   3.50%                      15.50%                  42.00%                 33.50%



              4th Bracket                    5.50%                      3.50%                      15.50%                      42.00%                  33.50%
              5th Bracket                    5.50%                      3.50%                      15.50%                      42.00%                  33.50%
              6th Bracket                    13.50%                    10.00%                      34.40%                      42.10%

                                                                    ANNEX XIX      Entry into effect

                                                          (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                                 ANNEX II

                                                            Simples Nacional Rates and Distribution - Industry

                                                                    (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                  For calendar years 2027 and 2028


                                 Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                     Rate                   Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                           (in R$)
   1st Bracket                 Up to 180,000.00                                                           4.50%                                   -
   2nd Bracket                 From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                               7.80%                             5,940.00
   3rd Bracket                 From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                               10.00%                            13,860.00
   4th Bracket                 From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                             11.20%                            22,500.00
   5th Bracket                 From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                           14.70%                            85,500.00
   6th Bracket                 From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                           29.90%                           720,000.00




   Brackets                                                                    Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                IRPJ               CSLL                CBS                   CPP                    IPI               ICMS                 IBS
   1st Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        13.85%                 37.50%                 7.50%             32.00%               0.15%
   2nd Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        13.85%                 37.50%                 7.50%             32.00%               0.15%
   3rd Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        13.85%                 37.50%                 7.50%             32.00%               0.15%
   4th Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        13.85%                 37.50%                 7.50%             32.00%               0.15%
   5th Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        13.85%                 37.50%                 7.50%             32.00%               0.15%
   6th Bracket                     8.53%                   7.53%        25.22%                 23.59%                 35.13%

                                                                 Simples Nacional Rates - Industry

                                                                           (In effect: 1/1/2029)

                                                                      Starting calendar year 2029


                                  Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                     Rate                   Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                             (in R$)
   1st Bracket              Up to 180,000.00                                                               4.50%                                -
   2nd Bracket              From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                   7.80%                            5,940.00
   3rd Bracket              From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                  10.00%                           13,860.00
   4th Bracket              From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                11.20%                           22,500.00
   5th Bracket              From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                              14.70%                           85,500.00
   6th Bracket              From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                              30.00%                           720,000.00

                                                                  Simples Nacional Distribution - Industry

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                       For calendar year 2029


   Brackets                                                                    Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                IRPJ               CSLL                CBS                   CPP                    IPI               ICMS                 IBS
   1st Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%             28.80%               3.20%
   2nd Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%             28.80%               3.20%
   3rd Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%             28.80%               3.20%
   4th Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%             28.80%               3.20%
   5th Bracket                     5.50%                   3.50%        14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%             28.80%               3.20%
   6th Bracket                     8.50%                   7.50%        25.50%                 23.50%                 35.00%

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                       For calendar year 2030


   Brackets                                                                    Percentage of Tax Distribution


                               IRPJ              CSLL                   CBS                    CPP                    IPI              ICMS                IBS
   1st Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            25.60%              6.40%
   2nd Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            25.60%              6.40%
   3rd Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            25.60%              6.40%
   4th Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            25.60%              6.40%
   5th Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            25.60%              6.40%
   6th Bracket                   8.50%                   7.50%            25.50%                 23.50%                35.00%

                                                                  (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                        For calendar year 2031


   Brackets                                                                      Percentage of Tax Distribution
                               IRPJ              CSLL                   CBS                    CPP                    IPI              ICMS                IBS
   1st Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            22.40%              9.60%
   2nd Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            22.40%              9.60%
   3rd Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            22.40%              9.60%
   4th Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            22.40%              9.60%
   5th Bracket                   5.50%                   3.50%            14.00%                 37.50%                 7.50%            22.40%              9.60%
   6th Bracket                   8.50%                   7.50%            25.50%                 23.50%                35.00%

                                                                  (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                        For calendar year 2032


   Brackets                                                                     Percentage of Tax Distribution
                              IRPJ              CSLL                   CBS                    CPP                   IPI               ICMS                IBS
   1st Bracket                  5.50%                  3.50%          14.00%                  37.50%                  7.50%          19.20%               12.80%
   2nd Bracket                  5.50%                  3.50%          14.00%                  37.50%                  7.50%          19.20%               12.80%
   3rd Bracket                  5.50%                  3.50%          14.00%                  37.50%                  7.50%          19.20%               12.80%
   4th Bracket                  5.50%                  3.50%          14.00%                  37.50%                  7.50%          19.20%               12.80%
   5th Bracket                  5.50%                  3.50%          14.00%                  37.50%                  7.50%          19.20%               12.80%
   6th Bracket                  8.50%                  7.50%          25.50%                  23.50%                  35.00%

                                                                             (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                       Starting calendar year 2033


   Brackets                                                                       Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                 CSLL                      CBS                      CPP                  IPI                      IBS
   1st Bracket                       5.50%                        3.50%            14.00%                    37.50%              7.50%                  32.00%
   2nd Bracket                       5.50%                        3.50%            14.00%                    37.50%              7.50%                  32.00%
   3rd Bracket                       5.50%                        3.50%            14.00%                    37.50%              7.50%                  32.00%
   4th Bracket                       5.50%                        3.50%            14.00%                    37.50%              7.50%                  32.00%
   5th Bracket                       5.50%                        3.50%            14.00%                    37.50%              7.50%                  32.00%
   6th Bracket                       8.50%                        7.50%            25.50%                    23.50%             35.00%

                                                                   ANNEX XX         Entry into effect

                                                        (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                                  ANNEX III

        Simples Nacional Rates and Distribution - Revenue from leasing of movable property and provision of services not listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary
                                                                             Law

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                  For calendar years 2027 and 2028


                                Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                       Rate                Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                          (in R$)
   1st Bracket           Up to 180,000.00                                                                   6.00%                                 –
   2nd Bracket           From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                       11.20%                           9,360.00
   3rd Bracket           From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                       13.50%                           17,640.00
   4th Bracket           From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                     16.00%                           35,640.00
   5th Bracket           From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                                   21.00%                          125,640.00
   6th Bracket           From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                                   32.90%                          648,000.00




   Brackets                                                                            Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                       IRPJ                   CSLL                     CBS                      CPP                    ISS (*)                       IBS
   1st Bracket                           4.00%                   3.50%                  15.43%                   43.40%                   33.50%                       0.17%
   2nd Bracket                           4.00%                   3.50%                  16.91%                   43.40%                   32.00%                       0.19%
   3rd Bracket                           4.00%                   3.50%                  16.42%                   43.40%                   32.50%                       0.19%
   4th Bracket                           4.00%                   3.50%                  16.42%                   43.40%                   32.50%                       0.19%
   5th Bracket                           4.00%                   3.50%                  15.43%                   43.40%                 33.50% (*)                     0.17%
   6th Bracket                          35.09%                  15.04%                  19.29%                   30.58%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:
                                       IRPJ                   CSLL                     CBS                      CPP                      ISS                         IBS
   5th Bracket, with rate
                               (Effective rate -      (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -      (Effective rate -    Fixed ISS percentage        (Effective rate -
   exceeding
                                 5%) x 6.02%              5%) x 5.26%             5%) x 23.20%             5%) x 65.26%                of 5%                    5%) x 0.26%
   14.93%


                                                            (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)

                    Brackets                 Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                           IRPJ                     CSLL                     CBS                       CPP                ISS (*)                    IBS


                    1st Bracket               4.00%                    3.50%                    15.43%                    43.40%             33.50%                     0.17%


                    2nd Bracket               4.00%                    3.50%                    16.91%                    43.40%             32.00%                     0.19%


                    3rd Bracket               4.00%                    3.50%                    16.41%                    43.40%             32.50%                     0.19%


                    4th Bracket               4.00%                    3.50%                    16.41%                    43.40%             32.50%                     0.19%


                    5th Bracket               4.00%                    3.50%                    15.43%                    43.40%             33.50% (*)                 0.17%


                    6th Bracket               35.09%                   15.04%                   19.29%                    30.58%


                     (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same
              annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:


                                           IRPJ                     CSLL                     CBS                       CPP                ISS                        IBS


                     5th    Bracket,           (Effective               (Effective               (Effective                (Effective             Fixed ISS             (Effective
              with        rate    exceeding - 5%) x         exceeding - 5%) x         exceeding - 5%) x          exceeding - 5%) x       percentage of 5%            exceeding - 5%) x
              14.93%     6.02%                   5.26%                   23.20%                   65.26%                                          0.26%




   Simples Nacional Rates - Revenue from leasing of movable property and provision of services not listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2029)

                                                                           Starting calendar year 2029


                                    Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                            Rate                     Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                              (in R$)
   1st Bracket             Up to 180,000.00                                                                       6.00%                                   –
   2nd Bracket             From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                          11.20%                                9,360.00
   3rd Bracket             From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                          13.50%                                17,640.00
   4th Bracket             From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                        16.00%                                35,640.00
   5th Bracket             From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                                      21.00%                               125,640.00
   6th Bracket             From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                                      33.00%                               648,000.00

      Simples Nacional Distribution - Revenue from leasing of movable property and provision of services not listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                       (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                              For calendar year 2029


   Brackets                                                                           Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                    IRPJ                   CSLL                     CBS                      CPP                     ISS (*)                        IBS



   1st Bracket                          4.00%                  3.50%                 15.60%                  43.40%                    30.15%                      3.35%
   2nd Bracket                          4.00%                  3.50%                 17.10%                  43.40%                    28.80%                      3.20%
   3rd Bracket                          4.00%                  3.50%                 16.60%                  43.40%                    29.25%                      3.25%
   4th Bracket                          4.00%                  3.50%                 16.60%                  43.40%                    29.25%                      3.25%
   5th Bracket                          4.00%                  3.50%                 15.60%                  43.40%                  30.15% (*)                    3.35%
   6th Bracket                         35.00%                 15.00%                 19.50%                  30.50%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:
                                     IRPJ                   CSLL                    CBS                     CPP                       ISS                         IBS
   5th Bracket, with
                               (Effective rate -    (Effective rate -    (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -     Fixed ISS percentage      Fixed ISS percentage
   effective rate
                                 5%) x 6.02%            5%) x 5.26%            5%) x 23.46%            5%) x 65.26%                of 4.5%                     of 0.5%
   exceeding 14.93%

                                                                             For calendar year 2029
                                                                 (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


                    Brackets                   Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                             IRPJ                    CSLL                   CBS                     CPP                     ISS (*)                IBS


                    1st Bracket                 4.00%                   3.50%                  15.60%                  43.40%                  30.15%                 3.35%


                    2nd Bracket                 4.00%                   3.50%                  17.10%                  43.40%                  28.80%                 3.20%


                    3rd Bracket                 4.00%                   3.50%                  16.60%                  43.40%                  29.25%                 3.25%


                    4th Bracket                 4.00%                   3.50%                  16.60%                  43.40%                  29.25%                 3.25%


                    5th Bracket                 4.00%                   3.50%                  15.60%                  43.40%                  30.15% (*)             3.35%


                    6th Bracket                 35.00%                  15.00%                 19.50%                  30.50%


                  (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 4.5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the
              same annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:


                                             IRPJ                    CSLL                   CBS                     CPP                     ISS (*)                IBS


                     5th    Bracket,            (Effective              (Effective               (Effective               (Effective             Fixed ISS            (Effective
              with        rate     exceeding - 4.5%) x      exceeding - 4.5%) x       exceeding - 4.5%) x       exceeding - 4.5%) x     percentage of 4.5%         exceeding - 4.5%) x
              14.92537%     5.73%                  5.01%                   22.33%                  62.13%                                         4.8%


                                                                        (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                             For calendar year 2030


   Brackets                                                                           Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                     IRPJ                    CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                      ISS (*)                     IBS
   1st Bracket                          4.00%                   3.50%                   15.60%                  43.40%                   26.80%                      6.70%
   2nd Bracket                          4.00%                   3.50%                   17.10%                  43.40%                   25.60%                      6.40%
   3rd Bracket                          4.00%                   3.50%                   16.60%                  43.40%                   26.00%                      6.50%
   4th Bracket                          4.00%                   3.50%                   16.60%                  43.40%                   26.00%                      6.50%
   5th Bracket                          4.00%                   3.50%                   15.60%                  43.40%                  26.80% (*)                   6.70%
   6th Bracket                         35.00%                  15.00%                   19.50%                  30.50%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:
                                     IRPJ                    CSLL                     CBS                     CPP                       ISS                        IBS
   5th Bracket, with
                               (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -     Fixed ISS percentage       Fixed ISS
   effective rate
                                 5%) x 6.02%             5%) x 5.26%             5%) x 23.46%            5%) x 65.26%                of 4.0%                  percentage of 1.0%
   exceeding 14.93%

                                                                             For calendar year 2030
                                                             (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


                    Brackets                    Percentage of Tax Distribution





                                              IRPJ                    CSLL                      CBS                   CPP                    ISS (*)                 IBS


                    1st Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     15.60%                43.40%                 26.80%                  6.70%


                    2nd Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     17.10%                43.40%                 25.60%                  6.40%


                    3rd Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     16.60%                43.40%                 26.00%                  6.50%


                    4th Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     16.60%                43.40%                 26.00%                  6.50%


                    5th Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     15.60%                43.40%                 26.80% (*)              6.70%


                    6th Bracket                  35.00%                  15.00%                    19.50%                30.50%


                     (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 4%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same
              annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:


                                              IRPJ                    CSLL                      CBS                   CPP                    ISS (*)                 IBS


                    5th Bracket, with             (Effective                (Effective               (Effective               (Effective              Fixed ISS           (Effective
              rate      exceeding    exceeding - 4%)       x    exceeding - 4%)      x    exceeding - 4%)       x   exceeding - 4%)      x   percentage of 4%          exceeding - 4%)      x
              14.92537%            9.15%    5.46%                    4.78%                   21.31%                  59.29%


                                                                        (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                             For calendar year 2031


   Brackets                                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                  CSLL                        CBS                        CPP                    ISS (*)                   IBS
   1st Bracket                           4.00%                 3.50%                      15.60%                   43.40%                    23.45%                  10.05%
   2nd Bracket                           4.00%                 3.50%                      17.10%                   43.40%                    22.40%                   9.60%
   3rd Bracket                           4.00%                 3.50%                      16.60%                   43.40%                    22.75%                   9.75%
   4th Bracket                           4.00%                 3.50%                      16.60%                   43.40%                    22.75%                   9.75%
   5th Bracket                           4.00%                 3.50%                      15.60%                   43.40%                  23.45% (*)                10.05%
   6th Bracket                         35.00%                 15.00%                      19.50%                   30.50%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:
                                      IRPJ                  CSLL                        CBS                        CPP                      ISS                     IBS
   5th Bracket, with
                               (Effective rate -    (Effective rate -   (Effective rate - 5%) x      (Effective rate -     Fixed ISS percentage     Fixed ISS
   effective rate
                                 5%) x 6.02%            5%) x 5.26%                 23.46%                   5%) x 65.26%                of 3.5%                percentage of 1.5%
   exceeding 14.93%

                                                                           For calendar year 2031
                                                               (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


                    Brackets                    Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                              IRPJ                    CSLL                      CBS                      CPP                  ISS (*)                 IBS


                    1st Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     15.60%                   43.40%               23.45%                  10.05%


                    2nd Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     17.10%                   43.40%               22.40%                  9.60%


                    3rd Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     16.60%                   43.40%               22.75%                  9.75%


                    4th Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     16.60%                   43.40%               22.75%                  9.75%


                    5th Bracket                  4.00%                   3.50%                     15.60%                   43.40%               23.45% (*)              10.05%


                    6th Bracket                  35.00%                  15.00%                    19.50%                   30.50%


                  (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 3.5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the
              same annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:




                                               IRPJ                     CSLL                    CBS                     CPP                    ISS (*)                 IBS


                    5th Bracket, with             (Effective                (Effective                 (Effective              (Effective              Fixed ISS           (Effective
              rate     exceeding     exceeding - 3.5%) x        exceeding - 3.5%) x         exceeding - 3.5%) x      exceeding - 3.5%) x      percentage of 3.5%        exceeding - 3.5%)
              14.92537%           13.13%     5.23%                    4.57%                     20.38%                 56.69%


                                                                         (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                               For calendar year 2032


   Brackets                                                                           Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                       IRPJ                    CSLL                      CBS                      CPP                      ISS (*)                IBS
   1st Bracket                           4.00%                    3.50%                 15.60%                      43.40%                    20.10%               13.40%
   2nd Bracket                           4.00%                    3.50%                 17.10%                      43.40%                    19.20%               12.80%
   3rd Bracket                           4.00%                    3.50%                 16.60%                      43.40%                    19.50%               13.00%
   4th Bracket                           4.00%                    3.50%                 16.60%                      43.40%                    19.50%               13.00%
   5th Bracket                           4.00%                    3.50%                 15.60%                      43.40%                 20.10% (*)              13.40%
   6th Bracket                           35.00%                   15.00%                19.50%                      30.50%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:
                                       IRPJ                    CSLL                      CBS                      CPP                        ISS                  IBS
   5th Bracket, with
                               (Effective rate -      (Effective rate -     (Effective rate -    (Effective rate - 5%) x    Fixed ISS       Fixed ISS
   effective rate
                                 5%) x 6.02%              5%) x 5.26%             5%) x 23.46%                 65.26%                 percentage of 3.0%            percentage of 2.0%
   exceeding 14.93%

                                                                        For calendar year 2032
                                                            (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


                    Brackets                     Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                               IRPJ                     CSLL                    CBS                     CPP                    ISS (*)                  IBS


                    1st Bracket                   4.00%                    3.50%                   15.60%                  43.40%                 20.10%                   13.40%


                    2nd Bracket                   4.00%                    3.50%                   17.10%                  43.40%                 19.20%                   12.80%


                    3rd Bracket                   4.00%                    3.50%                   16.60%                  43.40%                 19.50%                   13.00%


                    4th Bracket                   4.00%                    3.50%                   16.60%                  43.40%                 19.50%                   13.00%


                    5th Bracket                   4.00%                    3.50%                   15.60%                  43.40%                 20.10% (*)               13.40%


                    6th Bracket                   35.00%                   15.00%                  19.50%                  30.50%


                     (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 3%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same
              annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 14.92537%, the distribution will be:


                                               IRPJ                     CSLL                    CBS                     CPP                    ISS (*)                  IBS


                    5th Bracket, with             (Effective                (Effective                 (Effective              (Effective              Fixed ISS           (Effective
              rate      exceeding    exceeding - 3%)       x    exceeding - 3%)        x    exceeding - 3%)      x   exceeding - 3%)      x   percentage of 3%          exceeding - 3%)
              14.92537%            16.77%    5.01%                    4.38%                     19.52%                 54.32%


                                                                                  (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                           Starting calendar year 2033


   Brackets                                                                                Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                              IRPJ                         CSLL                           CBS                        CPP                         IBS
   1st Bracket                                   4.00%                       3.50%                        15.60%                       43.40%                     33.50%
   2nd Bracket                                   4.00%                       3.50%                        17.10%                       43.40%                     32.00%
   3rd Bracket                                   4.00%                       3.50%                        16.60%                       43.40%                     32.50%
   4th Bracket                                   4.00%                       3.50%                        16.60%                       43.40%                     32.50%
   5th Bracket                                   4.00%                       3.50%                        15.60%                       43.40%                     33.50%
   6th Bracket                               35.00%                          15.00%                       19.50%                       30.50%

                                                                   ANNEX XXI Entry into effect

                                                        (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                               ANNEX IV

           Simples Nacional Rates and Distribution - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                  For calendar years 2027 and 2028


                                 Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                   Rate                     Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                           (in R$)
   1st Bracket            Up to 180,000.00                                                               4.50%                                  -
   2nd Bracket            From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                   9.00%                               8,100.00
   3rd Bracket            From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                  10.20%                              12,420.00
   4th Bracket            From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                14.00%                              39,780.00
   5th Bracket            From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                              22.00%                              183,780.00
   6th Bracket            From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                              32.90%                              828,000.00




              Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                        IRPJ                     CSLL                       CBS                       ISS (*)                        IBS
           1st Bracket                   18.80%                    15.20%                     21.26%                     44.50%                        0.24%
           2nd Bracket                   19.80%                    15.20%                     24.73%                     40.00%                        0.27%
           3rd Bracket                   20.80%                    15.20%                     23.74%                     40.00%                        0.26%
           4th Bracket                   17.80%                    19.20%                     22.75%                     40.00%                        0.25%
           5th Bracket                   18.80%                    19.20%                     21.76%                  40.00% (*)                       0.24%
           6th Bracket                   53.71%                    21.59%                     24.70%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:
              Bracket                     IRPJ                     CSLL                       CBS                        ISS                           IBS
    5th Bracket, with rate
                              (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x   Fixed ISS percentage      (Effective rate - 5%) x
       exceeding
                                      31.33%                    32.00%                    36.27%                     of 5%                         0.40%
             12.5%

                 Simples Nacional Rates - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                          (In effect: 1/1/2029)

                                                                     Starting calendar year 2029


                                 Gross Revenue over 12 Months
                                                                                                   Rate                     Amount to Deduct (in R$)
                                           (in R$)
   1st Bracket            Up to 180,000.00                                                               4.50%                                  -
   2nd Bracket            From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                   9.00%                               8,100.00
   3rd Bracket            From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                  10.20%                              12,420.00
   4th Bracket            From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                14.00%                              39,780.00
   5th Bracket            From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                              22.00%                              183,780.00
   6th Bracket            From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                              33.00%                              828,000.00

                  Simples Nacional Distribution - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-C of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                  (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                      For calendar year 2029


              Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                        IRPJ                     CSLL                       CBS                       ISS (*)                        IBS
           1st Bracket                   18.80%                    15.20%                     21.50%                     40.05%                        4.45%
           2nd Bracket                   19.80%                    15.20%                     25.00%                     36.00%                        4.00%
           3rd Bracket                   20.80%                    15.20%                     24.00%                     36.00%                        4.00%
           4th Bracket                   17.80%                    19.20%                     23.00%                     36.00%                        4.00%
           5th Bracket                   18.80%                    19.20%                     22.00%                  36.00% (*)                       4.00%
           6th Bracket                   53.50%                    21.50%                     25.00%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:
              Bracket                     IRPJ                     CSLL                       CBS                        ISS                           IBS



    5th Bracket, with rate
                             (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x     Fixed ISS percentage    Fixed ISS percentage of
       exceeding
                                     31.33%                    32.00%                    36.67%                      of 4.5%                      0.5%
             12.5%

                                                                   For calendar year 2029
                                                       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


         Brackets                        Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                       IRPJ                        CSLL                      CBS                         ISS (*)                   IBS


         1st Bracket                      18.80%                      15.20%                    21.50%                      40.05%                    4.45%


         2nd Bracket                      19.80%                      15.20%                    25.00%                      36.00%                    4.00%


         3rd Bracket                      20.80%                      15.20%                    24.00%                      36.00%                    4.00%


         4th Bracket                      17.80%                      19.20%                    23.00%                      36.00%                    4.00%


         5th Bracket                      18.80%                      19.20%                    22.00%                      36.00% (*)                4.00%


         6th Bracket                      53.50%                      21.50%                    25.00%


          (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 4.5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same
   annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:


                                       IRPJ                        CSLL                      CBS                         ISS (*)                   IBS


         5th     Bracket,    with          (Effective rate -         (Effective rate         (Effective rate -          Fixed    ISS         (Effective rate
   effective rate exceeding   4.5%) x 29.38%              - 4.5%) x 30%             4.5%) x 34.38%              percentage in 4.5%          - 4.5%) x 6.25%
   12.5%


                                                                  (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                      For calendar year 2030


           Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                       IRPJ                      CSLL                        CBS                       ISS (*)                      IBS
           1st Bracket                  18.80%                     15.20%                     21.50%                     35.60%                       8.90%
           2nd Bracket                  19.80%                     15.20%                     25.00%                     32.00%                       8.00%
           3rd Bracket                  20.80%                     15.20%                     24.00%                     32.00%                       8.00%
           4th Bracket                  17.80%                     19.20%                     23.00%                     32.00%                       8.00%
           5th Bracket                  18.80%                     19.20%                     22.00%                    32.00% (*)                    8.00%
           6th Bracket                  53.50%                     21.50%                     25.00%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:
            Bracket                      IRPJ                      CSLL                        CBS                        ISS                         IBS
    5th Bracket, with rate
                             (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x     Fixed ISS percentage    Fixed ISS percentage of
       exceeding
                                     31.33%                    32.00%                    36.67%                      of 4.0%                      1.0%
             12.5%

                                                                   For calendar year 2030
                                                       (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


         Brackets                         Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                        IRPJ                       CSLL                       CBS                        ISS (*)                   IBS


         1st Bracket                       18.80%                     15.20%                     21.50%                     35.60%                    8.90%


         2nd Bracket                       19.80%                     15.20%                     25.00%                     32.00%                    8.00%


         3rd Bracket                       20.80%                     15.20%                     24.00%                     32.00%                    8.00%


         4th Bracket                       17.80%                     19.20%                     23.00%                     32.00%                    8.00%




         5th Bracket                      18.80%                        19.20%                         22.00%                       32.00% (*)                8.00%


         6th Bracket                      53.50%                        21.50%                         25.00%


          (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 4%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same
   annual gross revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:


                                       IRPJ                          CSLL                           CBS                          ISS (*)                   IBS


         5th     Bracket,    with          (Effective rate             (Effective rate             (Effective rate              Fixed   ISS          (Effective rate
   effective rate exceeding   - 4%) x 27.65%                - 4%) x 28.24%                - 4%) x 32.35%                percentage in 4%            - 4%) x 11.76%
   12.5%


                                                                    (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                          For calendar year 2031


              Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                         CSLL                           CBS                          ISS (*)                      IBS
            1st Bracket                 18.80%                       15.20%                        21.50%                        31.15%                       13.35%
            2nd Bracket                 19.80%                       15.20%                        25.00%                        28.00%                       12.00%
            3rd Bracket                 20.80%                       15.20%                        24.00%                        28.00%                       12.00%
            4th Bracket                 17.80%                       19.20%                        23.00%                        28.00%                       12.00%
            5th Bracket                 18.80%                       19.20%                        22.00%                       28.00% (*)                    12.00%
            6th Bracket                 53.50%                       21.50%                        25.00%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:
              Bracket                   IRPJ                         CSLL                           CBS                           ISS                         IBS
    5th Bracket, with rate
                             (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x          Fixed ISS percentage      Fixed ISS percentage of
       exceeding
                                     31.33%                    32.00%                    36.67%                           of 3.5%                        1.5%
             12.5%

                                                                  For calendar year 2031
                                                      (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


   Brackets                           Percentage of Tax Distribution


                                    IRPJ                         CSLL                         CBS                           ISS (*)                  IBS


   1st Bracket                         18.80%                       15.20%                       21.50%                        31.15%                   13.35%


   2nd Bracket                         19.80%                       15.20%                       25.00%                        28.00%                   12.00%


   3rd Bracket                         20.80%                       15.20%                       24.00%                        28.00%                   12.00%


   4th Bracket                         17.80%                       19.20%                       23.00%                        28.00%                   12.00%


   5th Bracket                         18.80%                       19.20%                       22.00%                        28.00% (*)               12.00%


   6th Bracket                         53.50%                       21.50%                       25.00%


   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 3.5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same annual gross
   revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:


                                    IRPJ                         CSLL                         CBS                           ISS (*)                  IBS


   5th Bracket, with rate effective   (Effective   rate    -     (Effective   rate     -    (Effective   rate      -    Fixed ISS percentage   (Effective   rate    -
   exceeding 12.5%                 3.5%) x 26.11%               3.5%) x 26.67%               3.5%) x 30.56%                of 3.5%                  3.5%) x 16.67%


                                                                    (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                          For calendar year 2032


              Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                         CSLL                           CBS                          ISS (*)                      IBS
            1st Bracket                 18.80%                       15.20%                        21.50%                        26.70%                       17.80%
            2nd Bracket                 19.80%                       15.20%                        25.00%                        24.00%                       16.00%
            3rd Bracket                 20.80%                       15.20%                        24.00%                        24.00%                       16.00%
            4th Bracket                 17.80%                       19.20%                        23.00%                        24.00%                       16.00%


            5th Bracket                    18.80%                    19.20%                     22.00%                     24.00% (*)                         16.00%
            6th Bracket                    53.50%                    21.50%                     25.00%
   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 5%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes of the same annual gross revenue
   bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:
              Bracket                       IRPJ                      CSLL                      CBS                            ISS                             IBS
    5th Bracket, with rate
                                (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x (Effective rate - 5%) x    Fixed ISS percentage        Fixed ISS percentage of
       exceeding
                                        31.33%                    32.00%                    36.67%                     of 3.0%                          2.0%
             12.5%

                                                                      For calendar year 2032
                                                          (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 227, of 2026)


   Brackets                              Percentage of Tax Distribution

                                       IRPJ                      CSLL                       CBS                         ISS (*)                      IBS

   1st Bracket                            18.80%                    15.20%                     21.50%                      26.70%                       17.80%

   2nd Bracket                            19.80%                    15.20%                     25.00%                      24.00%                       16.00%

   3rd Bracket                            20.80%                    15.20%                     24.00%                      24.00%                       16.00%

   4th Bracket                            17.80%                    19.20%                     23.00%                      24.00%                       16.00%

   5th Bracket                            18.80%                    19.20%                     22.00%                      24.00% (*)                   16.00%

   6th Bracket                            53.50%                    21.50%                     25.00%

   (*) The maximum effective percentage owed to ISS will be 3%, with the difference proportionally transferred to the federal taxes and IBS of the same annual gross
   revenue bracket. Accordingly, in the 5th bracket, when the effective rate exceeds 12.5%, the distribution will be:



                                       IRPJ                      CSLL                       CBS                         ISS (*)                      IBS

   5th Bracket, with rate effective      (Effective rate - 3%)   (Effective rate - 3%)    (Effective rate - 3%)     Fixed ISS percentage       (Effective rate - 3%)
   exceeding 12.5%                    x 24.74%                  x 25.26%                   x 28.95%                    of 3%                        x 21.05%


                                                                            (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                       Starting calendar year 2033


                                                                                  Percentage of Tax Distribution
                Brackets
                                                  IRPJ                            CSLL                                 CBS                                  IBS
   1st Bracket                                      18.80%                          15.20%                               21.50%                               44.50%
   2nd Bracket                                      19.80%                          15.20%                               25.00%                               40.00%
   3rd Bracket                                      20.80%                          15.20%                               24.00%                               40.00%
   4th Bracket                                      17.80%                          19.20%                               23.00%                               40.00%
   5th Bracket                                      18.80%                          19.20%                               22.00%                               40.00%
   6th Bracket                                      53.50%                          21.50%                               25.00%

                                                                     ANNEX XXII Entry into effect

                                                          (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                                 ANNEX V

              Simples Nacional Rates and Distribution - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-I of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                     (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                    For calendar years 2027 and 2028


                              Gross Revenue over 12 Months (in R$)                                      Rate                        Amount to Deduct (in R$)
   1st Bracket              Up to 180,000.00                                                              15.50%                                      -
   2nd Bracket              From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                  18.00%                                 4,500.00

   3rd Bracket              From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                  19.50%                                 9,900.00
   4th Bracket              From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                20.50%                                17,100.00
   5th Bracket              From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                              23.00%                                62,100.00
   6th Bracket              From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                              30.40%                                540,000.00




            Brackets                                                             Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                      IRPJ                   CSLL                     CBS                       CPP                      ISS                        IBS
   1st Bracket                          25.00%                 15.00%                  16.96%                  28.85%                     14.00%                      0.19%


   2nd Bracket                      23.00%                  15.00%                  16.96%                  27.85%                 17.00%                   0.19%
   3rd Bracket                      24.00%                  15.00%                  17.95%                  23.85%                 19.00%                   0.20%
   4th Bracket                      21.00%                  15.00%                  18.94%                  23.85%                 21.00%                   0.21%
   5th Bracket                      23.00%                  12.50%                  16.96%                  23.85%                 23.50%                   0.19%
   6th Bracket                      35.10%                  15.54%                  19.78%                  29.58%

                Simples Nacional Rates - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-I of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                         (In effect: 1/1/2029)

                                                                   Starting calendar year 2029


                           Gross Revenue over 12 Months (in R$)                                      Rate                   Amount to Deduct (in R$)
   1st Bracket          Up to 180,000.00                                                               15.50%                                 -
   2nd Bracket          From 180,000.01 to 360,000.00                                                   18.00%                             4,500.00
   3rd Bracket          From 360,000.01 to 720,000.00                                                   19.50%                             9,900.00
   4th Bracket          From 720,000.01 to 1,800,000.00                                                 20.50%                            17,100.00
   5th Bracket          From 1,800,000.01 to 3,600,000.00                                               23.00%                            62,100.00
   6th Bracket          From 3,600,000.01 to 4,800,000.00                                               30.50%                            540,000.00

                Simples Nacional Distribution - Revenue from provision of services listed under § 5-I of art. 18 of this Complementary Law

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                     For calendar year 2029


           Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                   CSLL                    CBS                        CPP                  ISS                     IBS
   1st Bracket                      25.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  28.85%                 12.60%                   1.40%
   2nd Bracket                      23.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  27.85%                 15.30%                   1.70%
   3rd Bracket                      24.00%                  15.00%                  18.15%                  23.85%                 17.10%                   1.90%
   4th Bracket                      21.00%                  15.00%                  19.15%                  23.85%                 18.90%                   2.10%
   5th Bracket                      23.00%                  12.50%                  17.15%                  23.85%                 21.15%                   2.35%
   6th Bracket                      35.00%                  15.50%                  20.00%                  29.50%

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                     For calendar year 2030


           Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                   CSLL                    CBS                        CPP                  ISS                     IBS
   1st Bracket                      25.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  28.85%                 11.20%                   2.80%
   2nd Bracket                      23.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  27.85%                 13.60%                   3.40%
   3rd Bracket                      24.00%                  15.00%                  18.15%                  23.85%                 15.20%                   3.80%
   4th Bracket                      21.00%                  15.00%                  19.15%                  23.85%                 16.80%                   4.20%
   5th Bracket                      23.00%                  12.50%                  17.15%                  23.85%                 18.80%                   4.70%
   6th Bracket                      35.00%                  15.50%                  20.00%                  29.50%

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                     For calendar year 2031


           Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                   CSLL                    CBS                        CPP                  ISS                     IBS
   1st Bracket                      25.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  28.85%                 9.80%                    4.20%
   2nd Bracket                      23.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  27.85%                 11.90%                   5.10%
   3rd Bracket                      24.00%                  15.00%                  18.15%                  23.85%                 13.30%                   5.70%
   4th Bracket                      21.00%                  15.00%                  19.15%                  23.85%                 14.70%                   6.30%
   5th Bracket                      23.00%                  12.50%                  17.15%                  23.85%                 16.45%                   7.05%
   6th Bracket                      35.00%                  15.50%                  20.00%                  29.50%

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                     For calendar year 2032


           Brackets                                                          Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                   IRPJ                   CSLL                    CBS                        CPP                  ISS                     IBS
   1st Bracket                      25.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  28.85%                 8.40%                    5.60%
   2nd Bracket                      23.00%                  15.00%                  17.15%                  27.85%                 10.20%                   6.80%


   3rd Bracket                        24.00%                 15.00%                  18.15%                  23.85%                    11.40%               7.60%
   4th Bracket                        21.00%                 15.00%                  19.15%                  23.85%                    12.60%               8.40%
   5th Bracket                        23.00%                 12.50%                  17.15%                  23.85%                    14.10%               9.40%
   6th Bracket                        35.00%                 15.50%                  20.00%                  29.50%

                                                                          (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                    Starting calendar year 2033


              Brackets                                                           Percentage of Tax Distribution
                                        IRPJ                        CSLL                          CBS                       CPP                        IBS
   1st Bracket                            25.00%                      15.00%                     17.15%                       28.85%                    14.00%
   2nd Bracket                            23.00%                      15.00%                     17.15%                       27.85%                    17.00%
   3rd Bracket                            24.00%                      15.00%                     18.15%                       23.85%                    19.00%
   4th Bracket                            21.00%                      15.00%                     19.15%                       23.85%                    21.00%
   5th Bracket                            23.00%                      12.50%                     17.15%                       23.85%                    23.50%
   6th Bracket                            35.00%                      15.50%                     20.00%                       29.50%

                                                                   ANNEX XXIII Entry into effect

                                                          (Complementary Law No. 123, of December 14, 2006)

                                                                              ANNEX VII

                                                         Fixed Amounts for Individual Microentrepreneur (MEI)

                                                                   (In effect: 1/1/2027 to 12/31/2028)

                                                                For calendar years 2027 and 2028

               ICMS                          ISS                               CBS                                IBS                              TOTAL
              R$ 1.00                       R$ 5.00                          R$ 0.994                           R$ 0.006                           R$ 7.00

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2029 to 12/31/2029)

                                                                      For calendar year 2029

                ICMS                            ISS                              CBS                              IBS                             TOTAL
               R$ 0.90                         R$ 4.50                          R$ 1.00                          R$ 0.20                          R$ 6.60

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2030 to 12/31/2030)

                                                                      For calendar year 2030

                ICMS                            ISS                              CBS                              IBS                             TOTAL
               R$ 0.80                         R$ 4.00                          R$ 1.00                          R$ 0.40                          R$ 6.20

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2031 to 12/31/2031)

                                                                      For calendar year 2031

                ICMS                            ISS                              CBS                              IBS                             TOTAL
               R$ 0.70                         R$ 3.50                          R$ 1.00                          R$ 0.60                          R$ 5.80

                                                                 (In effect: 1/1/2032 to 12/31/2032)

                                                                      For calendar year 2032

                ICMS                            ISS                              CBS                              IBS                             TOTAL
               R$ 0.60                         R$ 3.00                          R$ 1.00                          R$ 0.80                          R$ 5.40

                                                                         (In effect: 1/1/2033)

                                                                    Starting calendar year 2033

                          CBS                                                    IBS                                                   TOTAL
                         R$ 1.00                                                R$ 2.00                                                R$ 3.00




                                                                    Presidency of the Republic
                                                                                    Civil House
                                                               Special Secretariat for Legal Affairs

                                                      COMPLEMENTARY LAW No. 214, OF JANUARY 16, 2025

                                                                                    Institutes the Tax on Goods and Services (IBS), the Social Contribution on Goods and
                                                                                    Services (CBS) and the Selective Tax (IS); creates the IBS Management Committee and amends
                                                                                    tax legislation.



        THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC I hereby make known that the National Congress decrees and I promulgate, pursuant to paragraph 5 of art. 66 of the Federal
  Constitution, the following vetoed portions of Complementary Law No. 214, of January 16, 2025.

                "Art. 26. .....................................................................................................................................

                ..................................................................................................................................................

                V - investment funds, subject to the provisions of §§ 5 to 8 of this article;

                ..................................................................................................................................................

                X - endowment funds established under the terms of Law No. 13,800, of January 4, 2019.

                ................................................................................................................................................"

        Brasília, July 1, 2025; 204th year of Independence and 137th of the Republic.

  LUIZ INÁCIO LULA DA SILVA

  This text does not replace the one published in the DOU of 7.2.2025.




                                                                                                                            *




                                                                                                                            *
