Art. 13.  Simples
Nacional entails the monthly collection, by means of a single collection document,
of the following taxes and contributions:

I - Corporate Income
Tax - IRPJ;

II - Tax on
Industrialized Products - IPI, observing the provisions of item XII of § 1
of this article;

III - Social Contribution
on Net Income - CSLL;

IV - Contribution to the
Financing of Social Security - COFINS, observing the provisions of item XII
of § 1 of this article;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

V - Contribution to
PIS/Pasep, observing the provisions of item XII of § 1 of this
article;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

VI
- Employer Social Security Contribution - CPP for Social Security, owed by
the legal entity, referred to in

art. 22 of Law No. 8.212, of July 24, 1991, except in the case of a microenterprise and small
business dedicated to the service-provision activities referred to in
§ 5º-C
of art. 18 of this Complementary Law;

VII - Tax on
Operations Relating to the Circulation of Goods and on the Provision of Interstate
and Intermunicipal Transportation and Communication Services - ICMS;

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

VIII - Tax on
Services of Any Nature - ISS.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 1  The
collection under this article does not exclude the levy of the following
taxes or contributions, owed as a taxpayer or a person otherwise responsible,
with respect to which the legislation applicable to other legal
entities shall be observed:

I - Tax on
Credit, Foreign Exchange and Insurance Operations, or Relating to Securities -
IOF;

II - Tax on the
Importation of Foreign Products - II;

III - Tax on the
Exportation, Abroad, of National or Nationalized Products - IE;

IV
- Rural Land Property Tax - ITR;

V - Income Tax,
relating to income or net gains earned on fixed
or variable income investments;

VI - Income Tax
relating to capital gains earned on the disposal of permanent assets;

VII - Provisional
Contribution on Financial Movement or Transmission of Amounts and of Credits and Rights
of a Financial Nature - CPMF;
				 (Repealed
by Complementary Law No. 214, of 2025)

		Pending effects

VIII - Contribution to the
Severance Pay Fund - FGTS;

IX - Contribution to
the maintenance of Social Security, relating to the worker;

X - Contribution to
Social Security, relating to the person of the entrepreneur, as an individual
taxpayer;

XI - Income Tax
relating to payments or credits made by the legal entity to
individuals;

XII - Contribution to
PIS/Pasep, Cofins and IPI levied on the importation of goods and services;

XIII - ICMS owed:

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

a) on operations or
services subject to the tax substitution regime;

a) on
		operations subject to the tax substitution regime, single-stage
		concentrated taxation (monophasic), and subject to the
		regime of advance tax collection with closure of taxation,
		involving fuels and lubricants; electric energy; cigarettes and
		other tobacco derivative products; beverages; edible vegetable oils
		and olive oils; wheat flour and wheat flour
		mixtures; pasta; sugars; dairy
		products; meats and their preparations;
		cereal-based preparations; chocolates; bakery products and
		the cookie and cracker industry; ice cream and preparations for the manufacture
		of ice cream by machine; coffees and mate, their extracts, essences and
		concentrates; sauce preparations and prepared sauces; preparations
		of vegetable products; pet food; motor
		vehicles and automobiles, their parts, components and accessories;
		tires; inner tubes and rubber protectors; medicines and
		other pharmaceutical products for human or veterinary use;
		cosmetics; perfumery and personal hygiene products; paper;
		plastics; pens and suitcases; cement; lime and mortars; ceramic
		products; glass; metal and plastic works for construction; roof tiles and
		water tanks; paints and varnishes; electronic,
		electro-electronic and household appliance products; wires; cables and other
		conductors; electrical transformers and reactors; circuit breakers;
		switches and outlets; insulators; lightning rods and lamps; air-conditioning
		machines and equipment; household centrifuges; weighing
		devices and instruments for household use; fire extinguishers; shaving
		devices or machines; hair-cutting or clipping
		machines; hair-removal devices with a built-in electric motor;
		electric water heaters for household use and thermometers; tools; ethyl
		alcohol; powder and liquid laundry soaps; detergents; bleaches;
		sponges; steel wool and fabric softeners; sale of goods
		through the door-to-door system; on operations subject to the
		tax substitution regime for prior operations; and on the provision of
		services subject to the regimes of tax substitution and
		advance collection of tax with closure of taxation;   (Wording given by Complementary Law No. 147, of 2014)
(Pending effect)

b) by a third party
that the taxpayer is obligated to, by force of applicable state or
district legislation;

c) on entry, into
the territory of the State or of the Federal District, of petroleum, including
lubricants and liquid and gaseous fuels derived from it, as well as electric
energy, when not intended for commercialization or industrialization;

d) at the time of
customs clearance;

e) on the acquisition or
maintenance in stock of goods not covered by a tax document;

f) on an operation or
service not covered by a tax document;

g)
on operations with goods or merchandise subject to the advance tax-collection
regime, on acquisitions in other States and the Federal District:

1. with closure of
taxation, observing the provisions of
 item IV of § 4º of
art. 18 of this Complementary Law;

2. without closure of
taxation, in which case the difference between the internal rate and
the interstate rate shall be charged, and the addition of any amount is
prohibited;

h) on acquisitions in
other States and in the Federal District of goods or merchandise not
subject to the advance tax-collection regime, relating to the difference between the
internal rate and the interstate rate;

XIV - ISS owed:

a) with respect to services
subject to tax substitution or withholding at source;

b) on the importation of
services;

XV - other taxes within the
competence of the Union, the States, the Federal District or the
Municipalities, not listed in the preceding items.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

§ 1-A. The amounts passed on to the professionals referred to in
Law No.
12.592, of January 18, 2012, hired by means of a partnership, under the
terms of civil legislation, shall not be included in the gross revenue of the contracting
company for taxation purposes, it being incumbent on the contracting party to withhold and
pay the taxes owed by the contracted party.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 155, of 2016)
Pending effect

§ 2
Observing applicable legislation, the levy of withholding income tax, in the
case of item V of § 1 of this article, shall be definitive.

§ 3  Microenterprises
and small businesses opting for Simples Nacional are
exempt from payment of the other contributions instituted by the Union,
including contributions to private social-service and vocational-training
entities linked to the trade-union system, referred to in

art. 240 of the Federal Constitution, and other autonomous social-service entities.

§ 4
(VETOED).

§
5º  The
difference between the internal and interstate rates referred to in items g
and h of item XIII of § 1º
of this article shall be calculated based on the rates applicable to
legal entities not opting for Simples Nacional.

§ 6º
The Management Committee of Simples Nacional shall:

I - regulate the form and
conditions under which the microenterprise or small business
opting for Simples Nacional shall be assigned the status of tax
substitute; and

II - may regulate the
form and conditions under which the ICMS advance-collection regime
provided for in item g of item XIII of § 1º
of this article shall be established.

	(See Complementary Law
	No. 214, of 2025)
	Pending effects

		§ 7
		 The provisions of item a of item XIII of § 1
		shall be regulated by an agreement entered into by the States and the
		Federal District, after consulting the CGSN and representatives of the economic
		segments involved.    (Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)     (Pending effect)

		§ 8
		 With respect to non-alcoholic beverages, pasta,
		dairy products, meats and their preparations, cereal-based
		preparations, chocolates, bakery products and the cookie and cracker
		industry, sauce preparations and prepared sauces, preparations of
		vegetable products, roof tiles and other ceramic products for construction, and
		detergents, the provisions of item a of item XIII of §
		1 apply to those manufactured on a relevant industrial scale in
		each segment, observing the provisions of § 7.
		(Included by Complementary Law No. 147, of
		2014)     (Pending effect)
