        Art. 62. The Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities are required to:       Effects to take place
        I - adapt the current authorizing systems and applications for simplified issuance of electronic tax documents for use of a standardized layout,
  that allows taxpayers to provide the data relating to the IBS and the CBS necessary for the assessment of these taxes; and

        II - share the electronic tax documents, after receipt, validation, and authorization, with the national common-use environment of the IBS Management
  Committee and the tax administrations of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities.

        § 1º For purposes of the caput of this article, the Municipalities and the Federal District are required, as of January 1, 2026, to:

        I - authorize their taxpayers to issue the national-standard Nota Fiscal de Serviços Eletrônica (NFS-e) in the national environment or, in the case of
  having their own issuing system, share the electronic tax documents generated, in accordance with a standardized layout, with the national data environment of the NFS-e; and

        II - share the content of other forms of electronic declaration, in accordance with a standardized layout defined in the regulation, with the national data
  environment of the NFS-e.

        § 2º The provisions of § 1º of this article apply until December 31, 2032.

        § 3º The data of the national centralizing environment of the NFS-e must be immediately shared in the national environment under the terms of item II of § 1º
  of this article.

        § 4º The standard and layout referred to in items I and II of § 1º of this article are those defined in an agreement entered into between the tax administration of the
  Union, the Federal District, and the Municipalities that established the NFS-e, developed and managed by the Comitê Gestor da Nota Fiscal de Serviços Eletrônica de padrão
  nacional (CGNFS-e - National Standard Electronic Service Invoice Management Committee).

          § 5º The national data environment of the NFS-e is the repository that ensures the integrity and availability of the information contained in the shared
  tax documents.

         § 6º The IBS Management Committee and the RFB may define alternative solutions to the NFS-e platform, subject to adoption of the national standard NFS-e layout
  for purposes of sharing in the national environment.

        § 7º Failure to comply with the provisions of the caput of this article shall result in the temporary suspension of voluntary transfers.

                                                                                   CHAPTER IV

                                                                    OF THE IBS AND THE CBS ON IMPORTS

                                                                                      Section I

                                                                            Of the Taxable Event
